

=== PAGE 71 ===

70 ORTHOKERATOLOGY
lens designs and one another, but also why the
results can differ depending on the design used.
A complete understanding of all these factors is
required in order to produce effective outcomes
with orthokeratology.
BASIC LENS FITTING PRINCIPLES
nlill
The traditional approach to the fitting and design
of rigid contact lenses is to choose the BOZR
based on its desired relationship to the flattest
corneal meridian (K). This led to the terminology
of "flat," "on-K," and "steep" as a means of de­
scribing the actual fitting, and eventually became
the commonly accepted description of the fitting
philosophy.
However, standard lens designs do not have
a steeper BPRj (commonly referred to as the
reverse curve or RC), as is the case with all forms
of reverse geometry lenses. The addition of the
RC curve to the lens design radically alters the
complexity of the fitting process, as the corneal
curvature changes induced are dependent not
only on the accuracyof the lens fit, but also on the
BOZR/RC combinations used. The RC forms
the tear reservoir (TR) which radically alters the
efficacy of the procedure, as will be described
later.
Therefore, the simple "flatter-than-K" philo­
sophy used when fitting standard contour lenses
has severe limitations when applied to reverse
geometry lenses, and a more accurate approach is
required.
SAG PHILOSOPHY
Any description of lens design and fitting must
first start with a definition of the shape of
the cornea that the lens is expected to fit. As
described in Chapter 2, the corneal shape is most
commonly described in terms of a prolate ellipse
in that the apical radius (Ro) flattens in curvature
at a relatively constant rate from the center to the
periphery of the cornea (Fig. 4.1). The rate of
flattening is termed the eccentricity value (e),
with the mean e-value being 0.50. Population­
based stu dies (Kieley et al 1982, Guillon et al
1986) have shown that approximately 95% of
corneas have e-values in the range of 0.30-0.70.
Figure 4.1 Schematicshowing differencesbetween
spheroidal,prolate,and oblateellipsoidalsurfaces.The
apical radius (RQ) is theradius of curvatureat the center
of the surface.For prolatesurfaces,the radius of
curvatureincreases(flattens)from the centerto the
periphery,whereasthe radius decreases(steepens)in the
case of an oblate.The radius remainsconstantfor
sphericalsurfaces.
The same studies also showed that over 90% of
eyes exhibited a prolate asphericity, with the
remaining eyes being either spherical (e = 0) or
oblate, in that the corneal radius steepens as the
peripheral cornea is approached. .
However, the use of eccentricity as a descnptor
of corneal shape is limited by an inability properly
to describe oblate surfaces (Lindsay et al 1997).
The other descriptors used are shape factor (p) or
asphericity (Q), which are related to e by the
following formulae:
p = (1 - (2 )
where p is shape factor and
Q=-e 2
where Q is asphericity.
The main attraction for using Q as a definition
is that it can describe either prolate (positive
Q-value) or oblate (negative Q-value) corneal
shapes. Most of the currently available :ideo­
keratoscopes give both e and Q-values, With the
former being quite acceptable when used to cal­
culate corneal sag and lens design. Q, however, is
preferred when describing corneal shape for
scientific analysis. The common values for normal
prolate corneal shapes are:
e = 0 (spherical) or e > 0 and < 1 (prolate)
p = 1 (spherical) or p < 1 and> 0 (prolate)


=== PAGE 72 ===

DESIGN VARIABLES AND FITTING PHILOSOPHIESOF REVERSE GEOMETRY LENSES 71
Q= 0 (spherical) or Q< and> 0 (positive values
are prolate, and negative values oblate).
Keratometry measures the axial radius of the
cornea at a distance of approximately 1.50 mm
from the apex. The flat-K reading is the mean
value of the two radii along that meridian, with
the same average radius value for the steeper
meridian, usually set at 90° to the flattest meri­
dian. The cornea is assumed to be spherical (e= 0)
for the derivation of keratometry values. K read­
ings, therefore, do not supply information as to
the actual shape and asphericity of the cornea.
Methods for deriving Ro and e-values from
keratometry have been developed by Wilms &
Rabbetts (1977), Oouthwaite (1991), and Lam &
Oouthwaite (1994). These techniques require
the use of either a two-position keratometer
(Rodenstock C-BES; Wilms & Rabbetts 1977) or a
modified one-position keratometer (Lam &
Oouthwaite 1994). The keratometry readings,
both central and peripheral, are fed into a specific
computer program in order to convert the K read­
ings into Ro and e-values that are then used to
calculate the desired lens BOZR.
As stated above, the common traditional fitting
philosophies are based on describing the BOZR
as a function of its relationship to the flat
keratometry (Kf ). This method works quite well
for small total diameter (TO) lenses (9.00 mm and
less) and relatively normal eye shapes. However,
the accuracy of the lens fit decreases as the TO
increases or if the cornea exhibits a steep or flat Ro
associated with either a high or low eccentricity.
If the cornea is steep centrally with a high eccen­
tricity, then the lens designed purely on kera­
tometry will result in a BOZR that is usually too
steep. Similarly, if the cornea is relatively flat cen­
trally with a low eccentricity, the indicated BOZR
from keratometry is usually too flat (see later).
The problems associated with these fitting
inconsistencies were investigated by Bibby (1979),
Atkinson (1984, 1985), and Guillon et al (1983)
and the concepts of tear layer thickness and
cornea and lens sags evolved. Put simply, sag­
based fitting philosophy describes a situation
where the sagittal height of the contact lens is
equal to the sag of the cornea plus an allowance
for tear layer thickness (TLT) at the apex of the
Figure 4.2 The conceptof sag fitting is that the lens
andcornea come into contact at the inneredge of the
first back peripheraldiameter(BPD,).The lens sag is
thereforethe corneal sag at BPD1 plus the apical tear
layerthickness(TLT). BOZO, back optic zone diameter;
AEC, axial edge clearance;AEL, axial edge lift. From
Phillips(1997) with permission.
cornea over the common chord at the point of
contact between the two (Fig. 4.2). The lens is
fitted to the flattest corneal meridian. This gives
the optimal BOZR when the corneal asphericity is
taken into account, especially in the presence of
astigmatism (Young 1998).
The lens is assumed to touch the cornea at the
junction of the BOZR and BPR,. An alternative
is that BrR, is in alignment with the corneal
surface, thereby creating a better distribution of
pressure at the point of contact (see later). The
thickness of the TLT is deepest at the corneal apex
and reduces to zero at the BOZO !BPO, interface
(junction of the optic zone and first peripheral
curve).
The existence of a tear layer between the cor­
neal surface and the posterior surface of the lens is
essential for three reasons: firstly, for the purpose
of promoting effective tear exchange for the main­
tenance of corneal physiology and secondly, the
variations in the positive and negative fluid forces
help control lens movement and centration.
Finally, a tear layer between the lens and cornea is
essential for preventing damage to the epithelium.
The ideal TLT for contour-designed lenses is
assumed to be approximately 15-25 J.1m.
Guillon & Sammons (1994) also point out that
the alignment of the lens to the peripheral area of
the cornea is of prime importance in maintaining
the correct balance of tear exchange, lens move­
ment, centration, and fluid dynamics. For this
reason, the design of lenses fitted according to the
sag philosophy should be primarily based on


=== PAGE 73 ===

72 ORTHOKERATOLOGY
calculations derived from corneal shape, with the
central parameters of the lens constructed from a
correct alignment or area of touch with the
peripheral cornea. The addition of the final
peripheral curve has little bearing on the fitting
behavior of the lens, but is essential for providing
the Venturi effects that promote proper tear circu­
lation around the edge of the lens.
The normal method of evaluating the fit of a
rigid contact lens is by assessing the thickness of
the postlens tear film thickness by the use of
sodium fluorescein. Depending on both the con­
centration of fluorescein used and the degree of
tear mixing present, the generally agreed min­
imum thickness of the postlens tear layer required
to render fluorescein visible is in the order of
15-20 I-Lm (Young 1988). This is of major impor­
tance when interpreting fluorescein patterns of
lenses with central TLTs of 20 I-Lm or less, and
particularly reverse geometry lenses.
FORMULAE USED IN LENS
CONSTRUCTION
The formula described above states:
Lens sag = Corneal sag + TLT (I-Lm) over the
chord of common contact between
the two surfaces.
The sagittal height of the cornea is given by:
z = Ro- -JRoz - yZ p/ p
where z = corneal sag, R o= apical radius, y = half­
chord and p = shape factor or 1- eZ or 1- Q.
The sag of the cornea is therefore dependent
not only on the apical radius and eccentricity
values, but also the chord over which the sag is
measured.
The calculation for spherical multicurve lenses
is more complex, with the sag of all component
curves needing to be added to the sag of the
BOZR over the back optic zone diameter (BOZO).
The basic formula for a tricurve lens is:
p = Xo + Xj +Xz
where Xo = primary sag of the BOZR at the BOZO,
Xl = sag of BPR j at the BPO j - sag of BPR j at the
BOZO and Xz = sag of BPR2 at the TO - sag BPRz
at the BPO,.
The same general principles also apply to lenses
of greater than three curves. The final formula is:
Sag = Rj + -J[RjZ- (OJ/2)2] + !(Rz)-
-J[Rl- (Oz/2)Z]- Rz- -JRzz - (OJ /2)2} +
IR3 - -JRi - (03 / 2)Z}-IR 3 -
-JRi - (Oz/ 2)Z}
where Rj = BOZR, OJ = BOZO, R; = BPRlt Oz =
BPOz, R3 = BPR3, and 0 3 = BP0 3.
A useful extension to this form of mathemati­
cal construction is to calculate the sags of the lens
and cornea over small (0.10 mm) chord incre­
ments and subtract the corneal sag from the lens
sag. These values are then represented on the
y-axis of a graph. The r-axis represents the half­
chord lengths from the center of the cornea to the
edge of the lens. Such a graph then represents
the tear layer profile of the lens, or, put more
simply, the shape of the tear layer under the lens.
Figure 4.3A represents the tear layer profile of a
Figure 4.3 (A) The tear layer profileof a contour lens
showing 20 I-Lm of apical clearance and corneal contact
at the junction of backoptic zone diameter and first back
peripheralradius. Notethat there is a relativelysharp
pointof contact between the two surfaces.(B) The same
lens as shown inFigure4.3 (A), but with a change in the
radiusof curvature of first backperipheralradiussuch
that the lens makes contact with the cornealsurface in
alignment withBPR1•


=== PAGE 74 ===

DESIGN VARIABLES AND FITTING PHILOSOPHIESOF REVERSE GEOMETRY LENSES 73
BOZR, back opticzone radius.
BOZR for the actual corneal shape is achieved. If
the patient had a low-eccentricity cornea, then the
keratometry-based choice of a BOZR of 7.85
would have led to a flat-fitting lens. Alternatively,
the use of the 7.85 mm BOZR lens (fitted 0.05 mm
flatter than Kf) on a cornea with an eccentricity of
0.70 would result in the lens being relatively steep
compared to the calculated BOZR of 7.95 mm
(Young 1998).
Chan et al (1998) compared the accuracy of the
fit of rigid gas-permeable (RGP) lenses by fluores­
cein analysis with two methods of determining
the BOZR. In the first the BOZR was determined
by using the simulated keratometric readings and
in the second it was calculated from the apical
radius and eccentricity values given by the video­
keratoscope. The definitive method of assessment
was the masked choice of the correct BOZR
based purely on fluorescein fit analysis. The
mean differences in BOZR between the simulated
keratometry values and the correct BOZR was
0.11 ± 0.05 mm, and for the fluorescein assess­
ment and correct BOZR -0.01 ± 0.04 mm. The
authors concluded that knowledge of the eccen­
tricity from videokeratoscopy provided a more
accurate prediction of the BOZR! cornea relation­
ship than that derived from central keratometry
measurements.
As previously stated, fluorescein is rendered
visible when mixed in the postlens tear film at a
thickness of approximately 20 urn, By drawing
a line across a tear layer profile graph at the
20 urn point on the y-axis, the probable zones of
fluorescein visibility can be made evident. For
contour lens with the point of contact between
the lens and the corneal surface at the edge of the
BOZD. Figure 4.3B, on the other hand, represents
a modification of the parameters of the previous
lens to allow for the common point of contact to
lie along the BPRj at the first back peripheral
diameter (BPDj ) .
These lenses exhibit a central TLT of 20 p.m,
tapering to corneal contact at the desired point.
For general lens designs, the TLT graph is
assumed to show the profile along the flattest
corneal meridian (Young 1998).
Manipulation of the lens design and fit can
then be made by altering the lens parameters
either to increase or decrease the central TLT or
change the axial edge clearance to the desired
amount. Decreasing the central TLT effectively
involves flattening the BOZR or decreasing the
BOZD, leading to a flatter-fitting lens. Conversely,
increasing the central TLT involves steepening
the BOZR or increasing the BOZD, leading to a
tighter fit. As a general rule, changes of 0.05 mm
to the BOZR lead to an alteration of 10 urn to
the central TLT if the BOZD is kept constant.
Similarly, changes of 0.5 mm to the BOZD will
result in a change of approximately 5 urn in the
TLTif the BOZR is kept constant.
By the use of lens design programs it is theo­
retically possible to design lenses of any appro­
priate combination of BOZR!BOZD to give the
ideal tear layer profile at any lens diameter
specified. This model of designing lenses based
on the concept of an ideal tear layer profile forms
the basis of most of the contact lens fitting
modules in the currently available videokerato­
scopes. The relative accuracy of the method can
be shown by the following example.
Assuming a cornea has an apical radius of
7.80 mm, and the lens diameter is 9.60 mm with a
BOZD of 8.30 mm, the indicated BOZR using
keratometric values and the accepted rule of
thumb of Kf + 0.05 mm would be approximately
7.85 mm. However, if the same BOZD value is
kept constant, and the eccentricity of the cornea is
varied, then the calculated BOZR assuming a
central TLT of 20 urn would be as shown in
Table 4.1.
Therefore, if the eccentricity is taken into
account, a more accurate indication of the correct
Table 4.1
Eccentricity
0.70
0.60
0.50
0.40
0.30
0.20
0.10
0.0
BOZR (mm)
7.95
7.90
7.83
7.78
7.74
7.71
7.69
7.69

=== PAGE 75 ===

74 ORTHOKERATOLOGY
example, the TLT profile of the lenses shown in
Figure 4.3 would indicate a light glow of fluores­
cein centrally, with a large mid-peripheral band
of apparent alignment with the cornea until the
TLT increased above the 20 urn level in the edge
lift area. This concept of analyzing the tear layer
profile and TLT takes on major importance when
assessing the design and fit of reverse geometry
lenses.
In conclusion, the design of lenses based on the
correct sagittal relationship between the lens and
the actual corneal shape described in terms of
apical radius and eccentricity results in a more
accurate and dependable relationship between
the BOZR and the corneal shape. The use of tear
layer profile graphs is an excellent method of
visualizing the fit of the lens on the eye and the
likely appearance of the fluorescein pattern.
However, as stated previously, the construction of
the peripheral curves also plays a very important
part in the overall design of the lens and its
behavior on the eye.
PERIPHERALCURVE DESIGN
The second curve of a tricurve lens design has
two major functions. It can be used either as
a "blend" between the BOZR and the point of
contact with the peripheral cornea, or if the
primary design criterion is to have the BOZR
align with the peripheral cornea, the secondary
curve becomes part of the construction of the
edge lift of the lens. As can be seen in Figure 4.3A,
the point of contact of the BOZR with the corneal
surface appears to be just that - a pointof contact.
Such apparently sharp points apply relatively
high degrees of pressure over a small area, and
can result in discomfort and adverse effects on
lens centration.
Alternatively, the area of contact shown in
Figure 4.3B shows a more even alignment with
the peripheral cornea, thus distributing the pres­
sure of contact over a larger area. The differences
between the two types of peripheral contact
were described in mechanical terms by Sammons
(1984), who used the terms "conformal" and
"counterforrnal" to describe the pressure effects of
the two. Conformal mid-peripheral curves meet
the corneal surface such that the two curves
Figure 4.4 The differencebetweena conformaland
counterformaledge design.The conformalsurface has the
curve orientedin the same direction asthe common
tangent,whereasthe counterformalsurfacehasthe curve
in the oppositedirection.From Guillon& Sammons
(1994) with permission.
(BOZR and BPR1) are similarly oriented to their
common tangent. Counterformal mid-peripheral
curves arise when the two curves lie in the oppo­
site orientation to their common tangent (Fig. 4.4).
The major difference between the two lies in
the degree of concentrated pressure exerted on
the peripheral cornea. Conformal curves are in
closer alignment with the peripheral cornea and
therefore spread the pressure over a larger area.
Counterformal curves result in a point of heavy
pressure over a small area.
Thomas (1967)was the first to consider the pres­
sure distribution of the peripheral area of
the contact lens and introduced the concept of
tangential peripheral "curves" as a means of con­
trolling both the peripheral pressure and of max­
imizing lens centration. Tangent peripheries are not
curves as such, but more an optical flat that meets
the peripheral cornea at an approximate tangent to
the surface at the point of contact (Fig. 4.5). Other
conformal peripheral curves commonly used are
either aspheric or parabolic (Guillen et al 1983).
The major advantage of conformal peripheral
curves over counterformal is enhanced centration
and better pressure distribution at the lens / cornea
interface. The effect that these types of alignment
mid-peripheries have on the overall sag calcula­
tions must also be taken into account when con­
structing tear layer profiles and determining
central TLT, and will be dealt with in greater detail
when discussing reverse geometry lenses.


=== PAGE 76 ===

DESIGN VARIABLES AND FITTING PHILOSOPHIESOF REVERSE GEOMETRY LENSES 75
Figure 4.5 A tangent conformalperiphery.Notethat
the "curve" is a straight line thatmeets the corneal
surfaceat a tangent to the point ofcontact.This results
in agradientof pressureacross the surface.
The accurate fitting of rigid lenses is dependent
on being able to design lenses based on the shape
of the individual cornea to be fitted. Furthermore,
the construction of the mid-peripheral curve plays
a vital role in distributing the pressure at the point
of contact between the two surfaces and in centra­
tion control. The incorporation of the different lens
variables into a tear layer profile graph allows for a
better assessment of the lens design and also
provides valuable information as to the likely
fluorescein pattern. The importance of a clear
understanding of these principles makes the intri­
cate interrelationships of the variables in reverse
geometry lens design easier to comprehend, and
this is vital if a successful fitting is to occur.
REVERSE GEOMETRY LENSES
General backgroundand history
Reverse geometry lenses differ from standard
lens designs in that the BPR 1 is steeper than the
BOZR. There are three basic designs of reverse
geometry lenses, comprising three-, four- and
five-zone lenses. It is the intention in this section
to explain the differences in design and fitting
methods using the sag philosophy. If a lens is to
have an optimal fitting relationship to the cornea,
the only method that is common to all designs is
that the lens sag must be equal to the corneal sag
over the common chord of contact between the
two, plus an allowance for apical TLT. This rule
applies whether there are three or 30 curves on
the back surface of the lens.
All orthokeratology lenses have "proprietary
curves" that are used by the manufacturer to
differentiate their design from all others. How­
ever, as will be shown in the following sections,
there are basic underlying principles that are
inherent to all the different designs, with the
major variation being the fitting philosophy or
the assumptions made regarding corneal shape.
The first patent for a reverse geometry lens
was granted to Nick Siviglia in 1988. The lens was
designed to fit postradial keratotomy and pene­
trating keratoplasty cases. No reference to ortho­
keratology appears in the patent documents. The
lens had a nominal BOZO of 6.00 mm, with the
reverse curve a nominal 1.50 0 steeper than
the BOZR, and between 0.50 and 1.50 mm wide.
The periphery of the lens was spherical. The
patent has been assigned to Paragon as the basis
for the CRT lens.
Wlodyga and Stoyan are credited with the
original design and fitting philosophy of reverse
geometry lenses for use in orthokeratology in
1986. The terminology "reverse geometry" was
originally applied to the design as a means of
differentiating between lenses where the second
curve (BPR1) is steeper than the BOZR and stan­
dard lens designs where the peripheral curves are
flatter than the base curve (Winkler & Kame
1995). Fontana (1972) has been credited by some
with the invention of the lens with his "bifocal"
orthokeratology lens.
However, the description of the lens, which
has a 6.00 mm BOZO with the BOZR 1.00 0
flatter than the periphery of the lens (which is
fitted "on-K"), seems to intimate that the central
zone was actually a "recessed optic" which was
cut into the lens after the peripheral curves were
worked. It is worthwhile remembering that it has
only been the introduction of computer numeric­
controlled (CNC) lathes that has allowed for the
manufacture of true reverse geometry lenses. This
was not possible with the older single-axis lathes.
The first patent for reverse geometry lenses for
orthokeratology was granted to Stoyan.
Three-zonelenses (ContexOK series)
The description of three-zone fitting is based on
the Contex lenses, but the same comments apply


=== PAGE 77 ===

76 ORTHOKERATOlOGY
to all other three-zone lenses. The original con­
cept of the lens was to avoid the chronic problems
of induced with-the-rule astigmatism caused by
the flat-fitting, poorly centering lenses that were
commonplace with the traditional orthokera­
tology techniques. This was to be achieved by
using a steeper secondary curve in order to max­
imize centration. However, an unforeseen effect
was the apparent increase in both the degree of
myopia reduction when compared to the older
techniques and a reduction in the time taken to
obtain the results (Wlodyga & Bryla 1989).
In general, it was stated that the lenses caused
"twice the reduction in half the time" and the term
"accelerated orthokeratology" was applied to the
process of fitting. The original design consisted
of a 6.00 mm BOZO, 3.00 0 steeper secondary
curve (the RC that forms the TR), an aspheric
peripheral curve 0.50 mm wide and an overall TO
of 9.60 mm, and was marketed under the name
OK-3 (Contex, Sherman Oaks, CA). Wlodyga clin­
ically assessed numerous lens design variations
over the next few years, but the most commonly
used lens remained the OK-3. By 1998, therange of
lens parameters was expanded to include any
combination of BOZOs from 6.00 to 8.00 mm in
0.50-mm steps and RC curves of 1.00-15.00 0
steeper than the BOZR in 1.00-0 increments, in
both spherical and aspheric forms. The earlier OK
series has been largely superseded by the four­
and five-curve designs.
Traditionalthree-zonefitting philosophy
The original fitting philosophy was to fit the
initial OK-3 1.50 0 flatter than the flattest kerato­
metry reading (Kf ), and modify the fit until
an area of approximately 3.00-3.50 mm central
"touch" and good centration was achieved. There
was no predetermined refractive change or target
outcome. The practitioner simply ordered the
initial lens 1.50 0 flatter than Kf and an extra two
sets of lenses, each 0.500 flatter than the preced­
ing. The course of treatment was considered over
when the corneal flattening ceased.
The fitting was complicated by the introduc­
tion of an entire range of different TR curves. The
use of a steeper RC meant that the BOZR needed
to be flatter than that used for the 3.00 0 RC lens,
and a steeper BOZR if a flatter RC lens was used.
Also, if a diameter larger than the standard
9.60 mm were required, then the RC curve band
would be wider, since the BOZO and BP02 were
fixed. This led to the larger lens being relatively
steeper than the 9.60-mm TO lens, so a flatter
BOZR was required in order to maintain the
correct fitting relationship. With over 150 differ­
ent design variables available, it is no wonder
that there were reports of inconsistent fitting and
results reported by practitioners using the lenses.
It was the inconsistency of results that led
Mountford to attempt to standardize the fitting
by adopting the sag philosophy to the choice of
initial trial lens.
The use of a very flat BOZR leads to the
presence of heavy central touch and peripheral
clearance when combined with a standard
contour fitting philosophy. This invariably leads
to lens decentration. Guillon & Sammons (1994)
defined the pressure developed by the postlens
tear layer as the tear fluid squeeze pressure
(TFSP), the force of which is directly proportional
to the thickness of the tear film at any point on
the corneal surface. The TFSP maintains lens cen­
tration by opposing the gravity and eyelid forces
that cause lens decentration (Hayashi 1977). If the
lens fit is flat enough, then the central TLT is zero,
and the TFSP plays no role in the maintenance of
lens centration. The lid force then becomes domi­
nant, usually causing superior decentration. The
lid-induced decentration causes a redistribution
of the tear volume under the lens, and the final
resting position of the lens is then dependent on
the balance of forces developed in the postlens
tear layer by the TFSP.
The inclusion of a steeper secondary curve
reduces the peripheral clearance such that the
lens is assumed to rest on the peripheral cornea at
the junction of the TR/RC curve and the edge lift
curve. The TLT therefore varies from a minimum
at the corneal apex to a maximum at the BOZO /
RC junction. Since the TFSP is directly propor­
tional to the thickness of the tear layer, there will
be a variation in the pressure as the TLT increases
from the central to the TR area. The decentration
due to the lack of a viable TFSP with a flat BOZR
is then compensated by the increased TFSP
induced by the deeper TLT of the reverse curve.

=== PAGE 78 ===

DESIGN VARIABLES AND FITTING PHILOSOPHIESOF REVERSE GEOMETRY LENSES 71
In this way, a flat BOZR can be combined with a
steeper secondary curve and still maintain lens
centration.
In sag philosophy terms, the sag of an ideally
fitting reverse geometry lens is equal to the sag of
the BOZR at the BOZO plus the sag of the RC
curve at BP02• This should equal the sag of the
cornea at the point of contact (BP0 2) plus an
allowance for central TLT. This is the same
concept described earlier for the fitting of contour
lenses in that:
Sag OK lens = corneal sag + TLTover the
common chord of contact
Figure 4.6 shows the relation of the lens with the
various curves and the fluorescein pattern.
The apical TLT for contour lenses is assumed
to be approximately 20 urn. However, this is not
the case with reverse geometry lenses, where the
typical TLT is assumed to be less than 10 urn or,
in some cases, zero. When the initial calculations
for the OK-3 lens using the sag fitting philosophy
were carried out, it was found that the variation
in apical TLT was extremely sensitive to alter­
ations in BOZR. If a central TLTof zero was used,
Figure 4.6 The sag philosophyappliedto reverse
geometrylenses. (Top) The lens and cornea come into
contactat the outer edge of the alignmentcurve.
(Bottom)The fluoresceinpatternshows the common
areas (1 Band 2Bthe reverse curve, and 1C and 2Cthe
alignmentcurve). Courtesyof ChristinaEglund, Polymer
TechnologyCorporation.
there was no peripheral contact with the cornea
at the edge of the TR curve. The minimal central
TLT that provided peripheral contact was 10 urn.
A central TLT of zero is possible, but only if the
TR radius or diameter is varied. Furthermore, a
TLT of 10 urn was felt to be more acceptable from
a clinical viewpoint, as a TLT of zero would mean
direct lens contact on the surface epithelium,
which could result in unwanted trauma.
The advantage of fitting reverse geometry
lenses according to the sag philosophy is that any
combination of BOZR/BOZO and RC can be cal­
culated to give the correct fitting relationship to
the cornea. The tear layer profiles of a group of
lenses with varying BOZR/RC combinations are
shown in Figure 4.7. Note that, even though the
shape of the tear layer profiles differ, all lenses
exhibit the correct sagittal relationship to the
cornea in that the central TLT is 10 urn, and the
lens rests on the peripheral cornea at the junction
of the RC and BPR2• Mountford (1997a) has
shown that the use of sag calculations based on
corneal shape and lens sag results in a more accu­
rate choice of initial BOZR than the traditional
"1.500 flatter than K" technique.
For a given cornea of Ro 7.80 mm and an eccen­
tricity (e) of 0.50, the indicated BOZR using the
1.500 rule would be 8.10 mm. However, if the
Tearlayerprofile
Figure 4.7 The tear layerprofilesof various reverse
geometrylenses having an equivalentsagittal
relationshipto the cornea.The variablesarethe back
optic zone radius (BOlR) and tear reservoir(TR) curves
that are2, 3, 4, 5,and 6.00D steeperthan the BOlR. The
2.00D TR curve hasa tear layerthickness(TLT) of 40 um
at the back optic zone diameter(BOlD),whilst the 6.00D
lenshas a TLT of 80 urn at the BOlD.


=== PAGE 79 ===

78 ORTHOKERATOLOGY
BOZR, back opticzone radius.
eccentricity of the cornea were specified, the cal­
culated BOZR using the sag fitting concepts for
an apical radius of 7.80 mm and a lens diameter
of 9.80 mm would be as shown in Table 4.2.
As can be seen from the analysis in Table 4.2,
the use of the "rule of thumb" would result in a
steep or tight-fitting lens unless the cornea was
basically spherical (e= 0) in shape. Furthermore, a
study involving two subject groups fitted with
the same-diameter OK603, but with the BOZR
chosen by the two different techniques, showed
that the refractive change measured was signi­
ficantly different between the groups over a 6-h
period (Mountford 1997a). Group 1 (13 eyes)
wore lenses fitted 1.50 0 flatter than Kf and exhi­
bited a mean refractive change of 0.91 ± 0.360
following the trial wear period. Group 2 (10 eyes)
were fitted according to the sag philosophy
and showed a mean change of 1.38 ± 0.58 O.
The differences were statistically significant
(F = 10.373, P = 0.0024 analysis of variance), indi­
cating that the accuracy of the fit had an effect on
the efficacy of the lens with respect to the refract­
ive change achieved.
There are over 150 different combinations of
BOZO/TR available with the standard OK series
lenses, so a logical approach to the determination
of the most effective design is required in order
to reduce the number of trial lenses necessary to
carry out the fitting procedure. The ideal-fitting
lens exhibits a fluorescein pattern that shows an
area of approximately 3.00-3.50 mm of central
"touch" surrounded by a wide and deep annulus
Table 4.2
Eccentricity
0.80
0.70
0.60
0.50
0.40
0.30
0.20
0.10
0.00
BOZR in mm (OK603)
8.45
8.40
8.35
8.30
8.25
8.20
8.15
8.10
8.10
of tears that tapers to the peripheral contact band
(Fig. 4.8). Assuming that fluorescein becomes
visible at a TLT of 20 urn, then a line drawn paral­
lel to the x-axis in Figure 4.7 will indicate the
relative areas of "touch" and clearance under the
lens. Areas of "touch" may be determined by
drawing a line from the point of intersection of
the 20 urn line and the tear layer profile to the
x-axis. The diameter of the apparent touch can
then be read off the x-axis.
The only lenses that satisfy the requirement of
3.00-3.50 mm of central touch are the 3.00 0 and
4.00 0 RC lenses. The 5.00 0 RC lens shows an
approximate touch diameter of 2.5 mm, and the
shallow RC lenses (1.000 and 2.00 0) show diam­
eters larger than 3.50 mm. Bara (2000) has shown
that the degree of corneal flattening is significantly
greater with the steeper RC lenses than the
shallow RC lenses. The main problem is that, as
the relative area of central touch is reduced, the
area of flattening is also reduced, which can lead to
significant ghosting and haloes in dim illumina­
tion. As the pupil dilates in poor illumination, the
area of corneal flattening is effectively smaller than
the pupil zone, thus causing a reduction in low­
contrast vision, which is made considerably worse
if the lens decenters (see later).
The optimal OK design used in the author's
practice was the OK704, which has an optic
zone of 7.00 mm and a secondary curve 40
steeper than the base curve. Since this RC was
preset to the BOZR, the only alteration in fit
possible was to flatten and steepen the BOZR.
There is a significant drawback in using this
type of approach, and that is that the TLT
profile varies depending on the shape of the
cornea being fitted. In Figure 4.7, the tear layer
profiles of a group of reverse geometry lenses
are shown. The variables are the BOZR and the
TR curve, but, significantly, both are totally con­
trolled by the differences in sag between the
area of central clearance and the depth of the
tear layer at the edge of the BOZO. Noack (per­
sonal communication) has termed this differ­
ence the "clearance factor" (CF), and for any
given clearance factor, there can only be one
single combination of BOZR and TR that will
satisfy the requirements of the sag fitting
philosophy. The CF is defined as the difference

=== PAGE 80 ===

DESIGN VARIABLES AND FITTING PHilOSOPHIES OF REVERSE GEOMETRY lENSES 79
Figure4.8 An ideal­
fitting three-zonelens
(Contex704C). Note that
the apical "touch" is
3.00-3.50 mm wide,and is
surroundedbya wide and
deep annulusof tears
trapped in the reverse curve
area.
between the TLT at the corneal apex and the
TLT at the edge of the BOZO.
The variations in clearance factors for 10.6 mm
diameter OK704T lenses over an apical radius
range of 7.20-8.50 mm, and corneal eccentricities
of 0.0, 0.30, 0.50,and 0.70, are shown in Figure 4.9.
Note that the CFs are greatest for steep corneas
with high eccentricities, and lowest for flat
corneas with low eccentricities. The TLTs of two
11.2-mm diameter OK704Ts on corneas of R o
Relationshipbetweenclearancefactor,apicalradiusand eccentricity
Figure 4.9 Variationin clearancefactor with varying
apical radii and eccentricities.
7.20 mm and eccentricity of 0.80, and Ro 8.40 mm
and 0.30 eccentricity are shown in Figure 4.10.
The BOZR for the steeper cornea is 8.00 mm and
the TLT at the edge of the BOZO is approximately
73 urn, The indicated area of central touch is
approximately 2.60 mm in diameter. The BOZR
for the flatter cornea is 8.86 mm and the TLT at
the BOZO is 49 urn, with an indicated central
touch diameter is 3.50 mm. These differences
between tear layer profiles for different corneal
Figure 4.10 The tear layerthicknessesof two" .2-mm
diameterOK704Tson corneasof apical radii 7.20 mm and
eccentricity0.80 (top line), and apical radius 8.40 mm
and0.30 eccentricity(bottom line).


=== PAGE 81 ===

80 ORTHOKERATOLOGY
Figure 4.11 Tear layer profile of aContex reverse
geometrylens.
shapes are responsible for some of the marked
variations in corneal response to the lens (see
Ch. 10), and are a major limitation of fixed reverse
curve designs.
The major problem with the early three-zone
lenses was decentration. Variations in lens diam­
eter still led to the common problem of lens
decentration, often superiorly, with the accompa­
nying off-center corneal flattening and induced
astigmatism. Since modifications of both the TLT
and lens diameter were generally unsuccessful at
controlling centration, the only other logical
approach was to modify the peripheral curve
design.
Contex reverse geometry lenses have a
standard aspheric peripheral curve that is, in
effect, a counterformal curve that bears a constant
relationship to the BOZR (Fig. 4.11). If the BOZR
is steepened in an attempt to improve centration,
the RC and the peripheral curve are also steep­
ened proportionally. This leads to marked peri­
pheral compression at the TR/peripheral curve
interface and an increase in the central TLT,
resulting in a tight lens fit that can limit or reduce
the corneal shape change (Mountford 1997a). The
logical alternative is to modify the peripheral
curve design so that it becomes conformal.
Three-zone lenses were limited by the direct
relationship between the BOZR and RCs. This led
to a minimum variation in apical TLT of 10 urn,
and some restrictions in the efficacy of the lens
with respect to refractive change. However, the
major problem continued to be decentration, and
this led to the development of four-zone lenses.
Four- and five-zonelenses
There are numerous variations on the theme of
four-zone lenses. The common structure of the
lenses is a central optic zone, an RC, an alignment
curve, and an edge lift. The five-zone lenses
divide the alignment curve into two separate
curves in order to produce a conformal periphery.
A brief description of the main designs is outlined
below.
The £1 Hage "asphericmold" concept
In 1997, EI Hage applied for and was granted a
patent describing continuous aspheric molds for
reshaping the surface of the cornea having an
inner concave surface matched to the topography
of the cornea (El Hage 1997a). The underlying
concept was to modify a lens curve adapted from
topographical data that would "include a flat­
tened pressure zone applying relative pressure
and thereby displacing underlying corneal tissue,
a steepened relief zone raised away from the
surface of the cornea to receive displaced corneal
tissue, and a flattened anchor zone to control and
direct movement of displaced corneal tissue into
the relief zones." In effect, the lens consisted of a
central optic zone, a second curve that was flatter
than the BOZR, an RC, and an alignment curve.
The central, second, and third curves were de­
scribed in terms of a polynomial (Fig. 4.12). The
peripheral curve is then designed to give an axial
edge lift of between 80 and 100 urn.
The lens construction is designed such that the
central optic zone (pressure zone) can vary with
the degree of refractive error correction required,
with the BOZR based on Jessen's concept of
0.20 mm flattening of the BOZR for each 1.00 D of
refractive change required (the Jessen factor). A
Figure4.12
The controlled
keratoreforma­
tion (CKR) lens
(from EI Hage
1997a).


=== PAGE 82 ===

DESIGN VARIABLES AND FITTING PHILOSOPHIESOF REVERSE GEOMETRY LENSES 81
Table 4.3 Design variablesof EI Hage lenses
cornea with a central radius of 7.80 mm and a
refractive error of 3.00 0 would therefore require
a BOZR of 8.40 mm (7.80 mm + [0.20 x 3.00 OJ).
Also, the pressure zone is varied with the cor­
rection required. High corrections (3.50-6.000)
have a pressure zone of 4.00-5.00 mm, and low
corrections (1.00-3.000) a zone of 6.00-6.50 mm
(Table 4.3).
The proposed mode of action is that the pres­
sure zone, which is separated from the corneal
surface by the tear film, provides a force that
moves corneal tissue towards the relief curve
zone. The anchor zone then limits the movement
of tissue any further, and has a secondary func­
tion of maximizing lens centration. The induced
redistribution of corneal tissue is then responsible
for the corneal curvature and refractive change.
Corneal topography data supply the central
radius (Ro), which is the mean corneal curvature
over the central 2.00 mm chord. Note that this
definition of R o differs from that of the usual
definition, where Ro represents a singularity at
the corneal apex. The shape factor of the cornea is
calculated as a mean of the eccentricity values of
up to 360 meridians at the pressure zone diameter
of choice, which is predetermined by the initial
refractive error. The sagittal height of the cornea
over this chord is then calculated using the
derived Roand shape factor values. The sag of the
indicated BOZR in millimeters (Ro + 0.20 Rx) is
also calculated over the same chord. The differ­
ence between the two is then assumed to be the
sag change induced in the cornea by the effect of
the lens. For a cornea of Ro 8.00 and BOZR of 8.60,
assuming a 3.00 0 refractive change, the differ­
ence in sag is 29 urn over the 5.00-mm chord of
the pressure zone. This is roughly equated to
10 urn per diopter of refractive change.
Refraction(D)
5.50-6.00
4.00-5.00
3.00-4.00
1.00-3.00
Pressurezone
diameter(mm)
4.00-5.00
5.00-5.50
5.50-6.00
6.00-6.50
d (mm)
1.20
0.80-1.00
0.60-0.80
0.20-0.60
The movement of the centrally displaced
corneal tissue is towards the relief zone, which is
"preferably raised above the reformed corneal
surface by about 12 urn per diopter of correc­
tion." In the above example, this equals a sag
difference of 36 urn. This is then added to the
29 urn of central sag change, resulting in a TLT of
65 urn at the edge of the relief curve. It is unclear
why a sag change of 10 urn per diopter of refrac­
tive change is used for the central calculations
and 12 urn per diopter in the relief zone.
El Hage obviously studied the final postortho­
keratology corneal topography in detail, as the
lens parameters are actually based on the altered
or final corneal shape. The controlled kerato­
reformation (CKR) lens was the first orthokerato­
logy lens design and fitting philosophy based on
topography data.
The Dreimlens
The other major development or modification of
reverse geometry lenses is the Oreimlens, de­
signed by Thomas Reim. The impetus for the lens
design was a requirement for enhanced control of
lens centration and the corneal response to the
lens. Reim (personal communication) describes
the lens in terms of it being a "dual TR" design, in
that there are two reverse curves on the lens back
surface. The basic design consists of a 10.00 mm
TO with a 6.00 mm BOZO. The first peripheral
curve forms a TR that is 0.60 mm wide, sur­
rounded by the second peripheral curve that
forms a TR that is 1.00 mm wide. The final
peripheral curve is 0.40 mm wide and is designed
to give an adequate axial edge lift. The real
difference, however, is in the relative steepness
of the two RCs. The depth and width of the TR
are intrinsically tied to the BOZR and BOZO and
their fitting relationship to the cornea, and this is
where the Oreimlens bears a major difference to
the Contex designs.
The second TR (as described by Reim) is in
effect an alignment zone designed primarily as an
aid to centration. The first RC, being 0.60 mm
wide, is therefore necessarily much steeper than
the BOZR in order to maintain sagittal equiva­
lency with the cornea. Reim applied for, and was
granted, a patent (1999) for the lens due to the

=== PAGE 83 ===

82 ORTHOKERATOlOGY
construction of the peripheral alignment curve to
control centration. The design was altered by
splitting the alignment curves in two, resulting in
a five-curve lens. In those cases where lens cen­
tration could not be adequately controlled, the
diameter was increased to 10.6 mm, with the
alignment curves being made wider.
The fitting philosophy is a variant of the Jessen
factor, where the BOZR is defined initially by the
refractive change required. To this, Reim adds a
further 0.750 flattening as a "compression fac­
tor," so that, for an initial central K of 44.00 0 and
refractive error of 3.00 0, the indicated BOZR
would be 44.00 - 3.00 - 0.75 or 40.25 0 (8.38 mm).
Once the BOZR has been chosen, the corneal
elevation (sag) data at the point of contact of the
alignment curve are read from the corneal
topographer. The other lens parameters can then
be calculated from the standard formulas dis­
cussed previously. The alignment curve is
designed such that it meets the corneal surface at
a chord of 9.20 mm for the 10.00 mm lens, with a
nominal TLT of 10 urn at the junction of the align­
ment curve and the reverse curve. The apical
clearance is set at zero.
The lens fitting is usually based on the flat-K
value and an assumed corneal eccentricity of 0.50.
The exact specifications of the Oreimlens are
unknown, but an approximation of the TLT can be
constructed using the formulas described pre­
viously. Reim intimates that there are blend zones
between TR} and the alignment curve that are not
shown in the following model. However, such
small variations would have a minimal effect on
the sag relationship of the lens and the cornea, and
the model can therefore still be considered a useful
example. The approximate TLT of a 10.00 mm
Oreimlens for a patient with an apical radius of
7.65 mm (44.000), an eccentricity of 0.50 and a
refractive error of 3.000, is shown in Figure 4.13.
If the 20 urn line is drawn across the TLT graph
in Figure 4.13, the apparent central touch diame­
ter is approximately 4.00 mm, surrounded by a
thin, deep annulus of fluorescein. The peripheral
alignment curve is approximately 1.00 mm wide.
The resemblance between the calculated TLT
profile analysis interpretation of the probable
fluorescein pattern and the actual pattern appear­
ance (Fig. 4.14) is obvious.
Figure 4.13 The approximatetear layerthicknessof a
10.00-mmOreimlensfor a patient with anapical radius
of 7.65 mm(44.00 OJ. an eccentricityof 0.50, and a
refractiveerror of 3.00O.
Figure 4.14 An ideal-fitting Oreimlens.Note the wide
area of central "touch"and the narrowand deep tear
annulusat the back optic zone diameter/reversecurve
area. There is a wide alignmentzone. The area of "touch"
and clearanceline up with theareas below and above the
20 um line in Figure 4.13.
The tear layer profiles of the Oreimlens for
3.00 0 refractive change on three different corneal
shapes are shown in Figure 4.15. Note that, in
contrast to the Contex three-zone design, where
the reverse curve was fixed with respect to the
BOZR, the differences in CF between the three
lens fits is minimal. In the case of the cornea
having an apical radius of 7.80 and an eccentricity


=== PAGE 84 ===

DESIGN VARIABLES AND FITTING PHILOSOPHIESOF REVERSE GEOMETRY LENSES 83
of 0.50 (a 7.80/0.50 cornea), the CF is 49.7 IJ..m,
followed by 41.7 IJ..m for the steep (7.20/0.70)
cornea and 53.2 IJ..m for the flat (8.20/0.30) cornea.
When the Oreimlens was first released, it created a
lot of interest, as the results achieved were more
predictable than those of the Contex lenses. The
reason for this was probably the enhanced centra­
tion, but the fact that the variation in CF was much
better controlled also plays a part (see Ch. 10).
The alignment curve is thought to cause a
second compression zone (the first being the BOZR
and area of central touch) that limits the movement
of tissue away from the center, and also provides a
peripheral "push" in towards the center.
Reim states that the BOZR is usually limited to
4.750 flatter than K, or a maximum refractive
change of 4.00 0, due to early problems with
corneal staining. However, he also states that
this could have been caused by edema, as the
incidence of staining appears to have resolved
with the use of a higher-Ok material. The lens
is currently made from Boston XO (Ok = 100
International Standards Organization (ISO).
Practitioners interested in fitting the Oreimlens
can either supply the manufacturer with topo­
graphical or keratometric and refractive data and
allow the laboratory to design the lens, or use a
trial lens set to determine the optimal fit. The
prime factors when assessing the lens are centra­
tion and active tear exchange. Modifications to
centration are usually effected by altering
the alignment curve, or by small changes in
BOZR.
Other four- and five-curvedesigns
Figure 4.15 The tear layer profilesof the Dreimlensfor
3.00 0 refractivechange on three differentcorneal
shapes. (A) Cornea with an apical radius of 8.20and an
eccentricityof 0.3;(B) cornea with an apical radius of
7.80 and eccentricity0.50;and (C) apical radius 7.20,
eccentricity0.70.
There are marked similarities between the
Oreimlens and all other four- and five-curve
designs. The Fargo lens (Jim Day) has the same
basic construction, except the BOZO and RC
widths are variable. Also the hyperbolic align­
ment curve is calculated from topography data.
A compression factor of 1.00 0 is used. The
Nightmove lens (Tabb) has a basically aspheric
alignment curve. The Orthofocus, R&R, Euclid
Jade and Emerald, ABBA Optical, Contex E and
Correctech designs, apart from minor differences
in fitting philosophy and curve band width, are
very similar to the Oreimlens.


=== PAGE 85 ===

84 ORTHOKERATOLOGY
The SciopticElM (GelflexVMCj lens
This lens was designed by Mountford, who com­
bined the BOZO f TR construction of the original
three-zone Contex lens with the Thomas concept
of a tangential peripheral curve in an attempt to
maximize lens centration. The initial design was
based on the original Conoid 9.00 mm TO and
6.50 mm BOZO lens increased to a total diameter
of 10.5 mm. The standard 10.5 mm Conoid has a
BOZO of 8.30 mm, so the 7.00 mm BOZO of the
Contex 704 was combined with a 4.00 0 reverse
curve such that the combined BOZO fTR dia­
meter became 8.40 mm. The addition of the stan­
dard 1.10 mm tangential periphery gives a TO of
10.6 mm. Based on simple sag equivalent calcula­
tions, the tangent cone angle for the lens was
determined by using the cone angle of the stan­
dard Conoid based on a BOZR that was 2.50 0
steeper than the BOZR of the OK704, as the calcu­
lated BOZR for the OK lens was 2.50 0 flatter
than the sagittal equivalent Conoid. The com­
puter program for calculating the initial trial
lens based on corneal data supplied from video­
keratoscopy was written by Michael Vincent.
The trial lens is worn overnight, and the results
of the trial were used to refine the final lens
parameters. The main limitation is that the sag
variation with this design is restricted to 10 urn
(0.05 mm) steps. It was the first fenestrated
orthokeratology lens, having three 0.25 mm fen­
estrations placed at the BOZO fTR junction at
120° intervals. The practice of fenestrating reverse
geometry lenses is also done by Contex and is
standard for BE lenses.
The WAVE design
Jim Edwards based the design of the WAVE lens
on Keratron topography data. The lens has a
6.50 mm BOZO and a reverse zone width of
0.80 mm. The BOZR is based on the refractive
change required. The alignment zone is approx­
imately 1.00 mm wide, and the TO is 1.67 times
the BOZO, resulting in a common diameter of
11.00mm. The topography data are downloaded
into the WAVE software, and the tear layer profile
of the lens is generated. The design utilizes some
very sophisticated computing to match the tear
layer profile of the lens to the corneal shape. The
Figure 4.16 The constructionof the Corneal Refractive
Therapy (CRT) sigmoid proximity curve.The sag
differencesbetween the threepreset curves are0.10 mm
or approximately25 um overthe length of the curve. The
sigmoid curve "blends"the back optic zone radius to the
reversecurve (RC), and the RC to the tangent.RZD, return
zone depth.
alignment zone and RCs include aspheric curves
that are designed to control surface tension forces
at the periphery of the lens in order to enhance
centration. A more detailed description of the
WAVE design is included in Chapter 8, covering
computer-aided lens design.
ParagonCRT
The CRT lens could be considered as a three-curve
lens, consisting of a spherical BOZR, a "sigmoid
proximity" RC and a tangential periphery. The
BOZO is 6.00 mm, with the reverse zone being
1.00 mm wide. However, the "sigmoid proximity
curve" is a polynomial curve that in effect
"blends" the BOZR to the RC, and the RC to the
tangent (Fig. 4.16). The BOZR is based on the
Jessen formula, with an added 0.500 as a com­
pression factor. There are five tangent angles avail­
able (see section on construction and design of
tangential peripheries, below). The TO of the lens
is set at 90% of horizontal visible iris diameter
(HVID), or commonly 10.50 mm. A 100 lens inven­
tory is used to determine the correct lens based on
fluorescein pattern analysis, with the first trial lens
being selected by recourse to a slide rule that uses
the flattest keratometry reading in dioptres and the
refractive change required to suggest an initial
lens. A computer program is also available that can


=== PAGE 86 ===

DESIGN VARIABLES AND FITTING PHILOSOPHIESOF REVERSE GEOMETRY LENSES 85
Figure 4.17 Constructionof a sigmoid proximitycurve.
The curve (1) is theblend between the back optic zone
radius and the reverse curve (2).Curve 3 representsthe
limit of the sigmoid curve for a given sag depth. If the sag
of the reverse zone is increased(4), the sigmoid curve is
lengthened.In bothcases, the tangent(5) remains
unaltered.In all cases, the distancein the x-axisbetween
the two sigmoidcurves is constant,and only thedistance
in the y-axis is altered in orderto control overall lens sag.
import data from the Zeiss Humphrey Topo­
grapher and select the initial lens.
The utilization of a sigmoid proximity curve to
blend the central and mid-peripheral zones of the
lens is a unique design concept, but the major
contribution it makes to the lens is that it is used
to control variations in elevation. As shown pre­
viously with three-zone lenses, the RC is the
major determinant of overall lens sag. Since the
BOZR is determined by the refractive change
required, and the tangents are limited to five
angles, the only other means of varying the lens
sag is to vary the RC. The concept of the sigmoid
curve is shown in Figure 4.17. Note that, as the
reverse zone is constant, changes to sag are made
by altering the vertical depth of the curve. This
therefore gives a far greater control of the sag
variations than is usually possible with fixed
reverse zone designs. The three most commonly
used return or reverse zone depths are 0.525,
0.550 and 0.575mm. Variations of 0.10 mm in
BOZR lead to a change of 7 urn in lens sag, whilst
a 1° change in cone angle effects a further 12.5 urn
variation in sag. The depth of the reverse zone is
rounded off to the closest 25 urn.
What differentiates the fitting philosophy is the
assumptions made concerning the movement of
epithelial tissue and how the lens design is
derived based on those assumptions. CRT uses a
variation of the Munnerlyn formula for refractive
surgery as a basis for the assumptions regarding
epithelial movement. The hypothesis is that, as
positive pressure is applied by the BOZR of the
lens to the corneal apex, epithelial tissue will be
redistributed towards the mid-periphery, near the
tangent area of the lens. The central corneal
epithelium is assumed to thin down by 6 urn per
diopter of refractive change required, and that the
peripheral epithelium will increase by approx­
imately the same amount. The "landing zone" or
tangent is therefore initially designed with a TLT
of 6 uru/D, or a degree of clearance determined
by the refractive change.
As the cornea changes shape, the peripheral
epithelial thickening increases to the extent that
the TLT in this area is reduced to zero. In effect,
this means that the lens is initially fitted with less
than zero apical clearance, and up to 24 urn of
clearance in the peripheral alignment zone. The
published studies of Lui & Edwards (2000) and
Mountford (1997b) show that the peripheral
cornea is not affected by orthokeratology lens
wear. Swarbrick et al (1998) have also shown that
the increase in corneal thickness occurs at the
edge of the BOZO, and not in the alignment
curve area. It therefore appears, at least from the
information to hand, that the underlying fitting
philosophy is not in accordance with the pub­
lished findings made about the redistribution of
epithelium.
The most commonly used tangent angle is 35°
(55° ISO). A cornea of R o 7.80, eccentricity 0.50
will change to a final shape of R o 8.176, eccen­
tricity zero following treatment. The cone angle
prefitting is 54.96°, and 55.14° postwear. The 55°
cone angle is the closest match to the pre- and
postwear corneal shapes.
The Paragon CRT was the first reverse geome­
try lens to receive Food and Drug Administration
(FDA) approval for overnight orthokeratology.


=== PAGE 87 ===

86 ORTHOKERATOlOGY
BE lens (Mountford andNoack)
The BE lens is a five-zone lens comprising a vari­
able BOZO varying between 6.00 and 7.00 mm.
The first RC is 0.50 mm wide; the second RC varies
between 0.45 and 0.7 mm in width. The final two
sections are the tangent and a reverse perioptic
edge lift. The BOZO is variable in order to create a
wider treatment zone diameter for patients with
large pupils. The first RC is designed to maintain
the squeeze film force generated at the edge of the
BOZO and hold it constant. The second RC is
steeper than the first, and simply returns the lens
back surface to meet the tangent. The tangent is
designed according to the axial radius of the
cornea at the point of contact with the tangent. The
reverse perioptic curve has its radius of curvature
in the opposite direction to the optic axis of the
lens, and simply imparts the required degree of
axial edge lift based on the cone angle.
The BOZR is not based on the Jessen factor, as
control of the refractive change required is based
on manipulation of the modeled squeeze film
forces in the postlens tear film.
The fitting procedure is totally based on topo­
graphical data, trial lens fitting and refinement of
the final lens parameters based on the evaluation
of postwear topography. The lens has three fenes­
trations at the midpoint of the first RC at 120
0
intervals. The fenestrations do not prevent lens
binding, but are present as an aid to tear
exchange and "freeing up" of bound lenses in the
morning. The preferred material for the lens is
Boston XO. A more detailed description of BE
fitting is included in the computer-aided design
and fitting section later (Ch. 8).
Alignmentcurve variationsfor reverse
geometrylenses
The major difference between three- and four- /
five-zone lenses is the alignment curve or curves.
Instead of a simple counterformal curve, the
modern four- and five-curve lenses use conformal
and tangent designs to control centration. The
EZM, Paragon CRT, and BE designs all use tan­
gents as the alignment curve. Tangents are not
curves and do not have a radius of curvature, but
are, in effect, "flats." The following section deals
with the construction of tangents.
Figure 4.18 Constructionof a tangent.See text for
details.
Constructionand design of tangential
peripheries
The basic concept of a tangential peripheral curve
is that it meets the corneal surface at a tangent to
the surface at the point of contact. This then
fulfills the requirements of a conformal curve,
and theoretically distributes the pressure effects
over a wider area. Thomas (1967) also postulated
that there was a gradual increase in the applied
pressure, being maximal at the center of the
tangent (the point of contact) and decreasing as
the edge of the tangent curve was reached.
A true tangent is not a curve, but a straight
line that represents a cross-section of a conic
section. The concept is shown in Figure 4.18. A
point P on the peripheral cornea is met at its
tangent by a line (A-B). The intersection between
the line A-B and the optic axis is designated the
cone angle (0 degrees), and is used as the
common form of specification in writing the lens
prescription. The point of contact on the corneal
surface is the tangent to the axial radius of the
cornea at that point, and is specified in terms of
R, and y, the half-chord from the optic axis to the
corneal surface. In Figure 4.18, R; is represented
by the line P-R and the half-chord y by the line
P-X.


=== PAGE 88 ===

DESIGN VARIABLES AND FITTING PHILOSOPHIESOF REVERSE GEOMETRY LENSES 87
Tearlayerprofile
Figure 4.19 The variationsin cone angle for different
lens diameters.
The axial radius is calculated using the formula:
RII =-VR02 + y2 _ y2p
The cone angle can then be calculated by the
formula;
Cone angle (0) = 90 - arcsine y/ RII
In order to specify the cone angle and RII correctly,
the half-chord y must be specified. In general, the
chord is equal to;
(BOZO + BPOI + 1/2 BP02)/2 or, more simply:
TO - 2(1/2 BP02), where BP02is the width of
the tangent curve, commonly 1.10 mm.
Therefore, for a lens with a TO of 11.20 mm,
the chord of contact will be 10.10 mm, yielding a
half-chord (y) of 5.05 mm. The cone angle is
dependent on the individual RII of the cornea, and
also the diameter of the lens to be used.
Figure 4.19 shows the variation in cone angle for
variations in lens diameter. As the diameter of the
lens is increased, the cone angle decreases in
numeric value, in that the angle actually steepens
with increased diameters. However, there are two
further factors that must be taken into considera­
tion when calculating tangential peripheries for
contact lenses. Firstly, the elliptical model of
Figure 4.20 The tear layer profile of a tangential
peripheryreverse geometrylens with the point of surface
contact set atvarying pointsalongthe width of the
curve. (A) '/,tangent,(8) '/,tangent.(e) '/.tangent.
corneal shape decreases in accuracy as the chord is
increased. Mandell et al (1998)have shown that the
peripheral cornea is in effect flatter than that
described by the aspheric algorithm used in the
elliptical corneal model. In practice, this means that
the RII value calculated from the above formula is
in effect steeper than the actual corneal value and
will result in a steeper cone angle than that actually
required. Secondly, the axial edge clearance of the
lens is determined by the cone angle.
Figure 4.20 shows the tear layer profile of a
tangential periphery reverse geometry lens with
the point of surface contact set at varying points
along the width of the curve. The axial edge clear­
ance (AEC) of the lens with the contact point
midway along the width of the tangent is approx­
imately 38 urn, with a cone angle of 51.98°. Most
practitioners would consider this to be an
insufficient edge lift.
Alteration of the edge clearance is achieved by
manipulation of the point of contact of the
tangent with the peripheral cornea. The same
figure shows the lens with the contact varied to
1/3 and 1/4 the width of the tangent band. With the
tangent set at a 1/3 point of contact, the cone angle
becomes 53.47° and the AEC approximately
62 urn, and at 1/4 tangent the cone angle flattens
to 54.17° with an AEC of 78 urn.


=== PAGE 89 ===

88 ORTHOKERATOLOGY
Tearlayerprofile
Table 4.4 Cone anglesof BE and EZM lensesover
the back optic zone radius (BOZR) range
The BElens uses the tangent design as outlined
above. The EZM, on the other hand, uses cone
angles based on a relationship to the BOZR of the
lens. The point of contact with the cornea occurs
at approximately 1/4 the width of the tangent,
which, like the BE, is 1.10 mm wide. The cone
angles for the EZM and BE trial lenses are shown
in Table 4.4.
The Paragon CRT lens also utilizes a tangential
periphery. However, unlike the BE and EZM, the
angle given as the tangent is not the angle that
the tangent makes with the optic axis, but its
opposite. CRT lenses have preset cone angles of
29 (61), 30 (60),31 (59),32 (58), 33 (57), 34 (56), 35
(55), 36 (54) and 37 (53). The values in brackets
are the ISO standard cone angles for comparison
with the other lenses. The cone angle is 35 (55), is
the tangent for the mean corneal shape of RO 7.80
and eccentricity 0.5. A 2
0
difference in cone angles
for the CRT equates to a difference of 25 urn in
Figure 4.21 The standard Contexcounterformal
asphericedge and three tangents,with 1/4, 1/3, and 1/2
pointsof contact.
As a general rule, the use of the 1/2 tangent on
lenses with a TO of 11.00mm or greater leads to a
tight-fitting lens, due primarily to the greater
corneal flattening than that assumed by the ellip­
tical formula. The 1/4 tangent gives a greater
degree of freedom when trying to compensate for
this effect and is preferred for the larger TO
lenses. If the TO is 10.60 mm or less, however, the
1/2 tangent is preferred, as the R, and cone angle
are theoretically more accurate, and the centra­
tion effect of the 1/2 tangent is maximized.
Finally, the point of contact of the tangent has
a direct bearing on the sag calculations for the
lens/ cornea fitting relationship. Figure 4.21
shows the standard Contex counterformal
aspheric edge and three tangents, with Ih 1/3
and 1/2 points of contact. Note how the sag dif­
ference between the lens and the cornea is
affected by the edge design used. This will cause
a change in the apical clearance of the lens. If the
standard edge represents the ideal fit, with
10 urn of apical clearance, then the clearance will
be increased by 7.5 urn if the 1/2 tangent is used,
resulting in a steep or tight lens fit, which will
adversely affect the corneal response to the lens
(see Ch. 5). As a result, the accurate fitting of the
lens is dependent on calculating the initial lens,
rather than using a different design and simply
adding a tangent to the prescription. As a general
rule, each change in cone angle of 1
0
causes a
change in sag of 9 urn.
BOZR
7.85
7.90
7.95
8.00
8.05
8.10
8.15
8.20
8.25
8.30
8.35
8.40
8.45
8.50
8.55
8.60
8.65
8.70
8.75
8.80
8.85
8.90
8.95
9.00
Cone angle BE
53.16
53.26
53.36
53.49
53.63
53.76
53.87
54.01
54.16
54.27
54.42
54.57
54.69
54.84
54.96
55.12
55.24
55.40
55.52
55.68
55.81
55.97
56.10
56.26
Cone angle EZM
55.62
55.89
56.15
56.40
56.66
56.90
57.15
57.39
57.62
57.86
58.08
58.31
58.53
58.75
58.97
59.18
59.39
59.60
59.80
60.00
60.20
60.39
60.59
60.78


=== PAGE 90 ===

DESIGN VARIABLES AND FITTING PHILOSOPHIESOF REVERSE GEOMETRY LENSES 89
DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTIONOF
ALIGNMENT PERIPHERALCURVES
Table 4.5 Comparisonof alignment curves(AC)
based on rule-of-thumb approach and calculation
assuminga tear layerthickness of 10 IJ.m at the
junction of the reversecurve and the alignment
curve
The most common form of alignment curve is
either spherical or aspheric. The splitting of the
four-zone lens alignment curve into two results
in a five-zone lens. As with tangents, the accu­
racy of the alignment curve is essential if the rest
of the lens construction is to be correct. There are
currently two methods of calculating alignment
curves for four-zone lenses. The first bases the
alignment curve radius on the flat-K reading,
whilst the other uses topography data to calcu­
late the curve at the point of contact with the
cornea.
sag between lenses of identical curves except for
the tangent. Each change of 2° is also related to a
change of eccentricity of approximately 0.30. The
range of cone angles is therefore designed to
cover a wide variation in corneal shapes. The
CRT system does not depend on the tangent to
control the sag of the lens, but instead alters the
sigmoid proximity curve to control the TLT at the
BOZD.
The difference in sag change per degree of
cone angle change between the BE and the CRT
lens is due to the placement of the point of
contact with the corneal surface.
Luk et al (2001) describe the following rela­
tionship between corneal eccentricity and the
alignment curve for four-zone designs based on
information supplied by various manufacturers:
1. If the eccentricity is between zero and 0.3, the
alignment curve is equal to the flat-K.
2. If eccentricity is between 0.31 and 0.55, the
alignment curve should be 0.05 mm (0.25 D)
flatter than flat-K.
3. If eccentricity is between 0.56 and 0.70, the
alignment curve should be 0.10 mm (0.50 D)
flatter than flat-K.
However, this is a gross simplification of the
curves required. Assuming a TLT of 10 IJ.m at
the junction of the RC and the alignment curve,
the actual values for the alignment curves in
order to satisfy sag fitting are shown in Table 4.5.
Note that, in all cases, the rule-of-thumb align­
ment curves are much steeper than those calcu­
lated from the eccentricity values.
The relationship between the degree of flat­
tening of the alignment curve with respect to
the central flat-K and corneal eccentricity is as
follows:
y = - 3.465x2 - 0.3396x+ 0.26 (r2 = 0.999)
where y is the amount flatter than flat-K for the
alignment curve, and x is corneal eccentricity.
For example, if flat-K is 44.00 D, and the
corneal eccentricity is 0.56, the RC needs to be
(-3.465 x 0.56 2) - 0.3396 x 0.56 + 0.26 or 0.93 D
flatter than flat-K or 43.07 D.
Figure 4.22 represents a four-zone lens on a
cornea of flat-K 43.50 D (7.76 mm) and eccentricity
of 0.50. The correct alignment curve is 7.901 mm. If
the assumed alignment curve of 7.81 (Kf - 0.25 D)
is fitted, the tear layer profile changes to that of
Figure 4.23. Note that the lens is effectively too
steep. In order to satisfy sagittal equivalency, the
RC must be flattened to 7.17 mm. In general, steep­
ening or flattening the RC by 0.15 mm (0.75 D)
alters the apical clearance by 10 IJ.m.
Some other designs assume that the corneal
eccentricity is 0.50 unless advised otherwise. In
general, for each variation of 0.10 in eccentricity
away from 0.50, the alignment curve will alter by
approximately 0.15 mm. If the eccentricity is less
than 0.50, the alignment curve will require steep-
-0.25773
-0.29996
-0.4259
-0.6334
-0.66895
-1.02788
-1.20456
-1.69261
-2.23517
-2.8251
Error (D)
43.5 0.0 43.50 43.24227
43.5 0.1 43.50 43.20004
43.5 0.2 43.50 43.0741
43.5 0.3 43.50 42.8666
43.5 0.4 43.25 42.58105
43.5 0.5 43.25 42.22212
43.5 0.6 43.00 41.79544
43.5 0.7 43.00 41.30739
43.5 0.8 43.00 40.76483
43.5 0.9 43.00 40.1749
General Calculated
Kf (D) Eccentricity rule AC (D) AC (D)

=== PAGE 91 ===

90 ORTHOKERATOLOGY
Figure 4.22 Four-zonelens on a cornea of flat-K
43.500 (7.76 mm) and eccentricity of 0.50.
Figure 4.23 Same cornea as Figure4.22 with the
assumed alignment curve of 7.81 (Kr- 0.25 0).
Figure 4.24 Tearlayer profileof a model Dreimlens.Note that apical clearance is 5 I-Lm, with a 10 I-Lm clearance at the
reversecurve/alignmentcurvejunction.
ening, and conversely, flattening if the eccen­
tricity is greater than the assumed 0.5.
Figure 4.24 shows the tear layer profile of an
ideal-fitting four-zone lens. Note that in this
example, the apical clearance is 5 I-Lm, and the
alignment curve meets the corneal surface at the
edge of the reverse curve and the edge lift curve.
How sensitive is this curve to change, and how
do those changes affect the final fit?
In Figure 4.25 the effect of steepening or
flattening the alignment curve by as small an
amount as 0.05 mm (0.25 D) is shown. In effect,
flattening the alignment curve by 0.05 mm results
in a decrease of central clearance of 5 I-Lm, and


=== PAGE 92 ===

DESIGN VARIABLES AND FITTING PHILOSOPHIESOF REVERSE GEOMETRY LENSES 91
B
Figure 4.25 (A) The effect of flattening the alignmentcurve by0.05 mm(0.25 0). The apical clearanceis nowclose to
zero. (B) The effect of steepeningthe alignmentcurve by0.05 mm (0.250).The apical clearanceis now 10urn, and the
clearanceat the reverse curve/alignmentcurvejunction 15 urn. This small change in alignmentcurve could cause a
steep fit and associatedcentral island,or a lackof refractivechange.
steepening the curve by the same amount adds
5 urn to the apical clearance.
The above examples give some basic rules with
respect to alterations to alignment curves and RC.
1. If the alignment curve is flattened by 0.05 mm
(0.250), the apical clearance decreasesby 5 urn.
2. If the alignment curve is steepened by 0.05 mm
(0.250), the apical clearance increasesby 5 um.


=== PAGE 93 ===

92 ORTHOKERATOLOGY
3. If the RC is flattened by 0.15 mm (0.750), the
apical clearance is decreasedby 10 I-Lm.
4. If the RC is steepened by 0.15 mm (0.75 0), the
apical clearance is increasedby 10 I-Lm.
These rules only apply if one curve is changed. If
both curves are changed at the same time, the
results are additive.
In the case of five-zone lenses, the second
alignment curve acts as a fulcrum, and is less
sensitive to change than the four-zone lens. For
example Figure 4.26A shows an ideal fit, whilst
Figure 4.26B shows that flattening the curve by as
much as 0.20 mm (1.00 0) has no effect on the
apical clearance. Steepening the second alignment
curve by 0.05 mm (0.25 0) increases the apical
Figure 4.26 (A) Tear layer profileof an ideal-fitting
five-zonelens. (8) Effectof flattening the second
alignmentcurve by0.20 mm (1.00 D). Note that the
apical clearanceremainsunaltered,but the contact point
is now counterformal.(C) Effectof steepeningthe second
alignmentcurve by0.05 mm (0.25 D). The apical
clearanceis increasedbyapproximately5 I-Lm.
clearance by approximately 5 I-Lm (Figure 4.26C).
If the final curve is flattened too much, a counter­
formal periphery results.
The major problem with counterformal peri­
phery lenses is that the control of centration is lost,
and discomfort levels increase due to the heavy
point of contact between the lens and the cornea.
The most important thing to note about these
apparently minor changes to the alignment
curves is that they all have a major effect on the
apical clearance of the lens andare not detectableby
fluorescein pattern analysis. As stated previously,
the accepted minimum TLT at which fluorescein
becomes visible is in the range of 15-20 I-Lm. All
the changes used in the examples above have an
effect of changing the clearance in the alignment


=== PAGE 94 ===

DESIGN VARIABLES AND FITTING PHILOSOPHIESOF REVERSE GEOMETRY LENSES 93
zone by approximately 10 urn at a maximum, and
as a result, these changes would not be seen in
the fluorescein pattern. The same changes would
occur when aspheric alignment curves are used,
as the corneal eccentricity controls the eccentricity
of the alignment curve. If an aspheric alignment
curve is too steep or flat, the point of contact
between the lens and the cornea will move,
resulting in a change in the apical clearance. A flat
aspheric curve would decrease apical clearance as
the point of contact would move further in
towards the BOZO of the lens. A tight or steep
aspheric alignment curve would increase apical
clearance.
The use of a simple rule to determine the
curvature of the alignment curve based on a rela­
tionship to the flat-K is shown to be highly in­
accurate. However, errors also occur in using
topography data, as different instruments will
give different eccentricity values for the same
cornea, resulting in different alignment curves
depending on which instrument is used. The
method of analyzing these inaccuracies and
their correction is covered in greater detail in
Chapter 6.
Other design variables
There are three approaches that can be used to
design and fit reverse geometry lenses. The first
takes the Jessen (1962) concept of using the liquid
lens as the correcting factor. The original "ortho­
focus" technique basically consisted of choosing
the BOZR of the lens such that the liquid lens
provided the refractive correction, resulting in all
lenses having a plano power. In effect, if the
patient had a refractive error of 2.00 0 myopia,
the BOZR was fitted 2.000 flatter than the Kf.
This invariably led to unstable fitting, especially
as the degree of myopia increased.
The efficacy of this approach to fitting has not
been subjected to proper analysis, as Jessen never
published the results of his studies. However, the
concept has been applied to the fitting of reverse
geometry lenses by EI Hage et al (1997), Reim
(Oreimlens), Day (Fargo), Tabb (Nightmove),
Stoyan (Contex BB), Breece (Correctech), Gladys
(Euclid Jade and Emerald), Blackburn (Ortho­
focus), Legerton (CRT), and Reinhart (R&R) such
that the refractive correction required is once
again the liquid lens, plus an allowance for a
compression factor of between 0.00 and 1.00 O.
The second curve chosen is the alignment curve,
with the RC being calculated to achieve the
correct sagittal fitting relationship to the cornea.
This can be summarized as follows:
1. Choose a BOZR based on the initial refractive
error and modify the alignment curve and TR
to adjust the fit.
The second concept is to use a constant TR curve
and BOZO, as in the Contex OK and EZM, and
modify the BOZR until the correct sag relation­
ship between the lens and the cornea is achieved.
This approach makes no predictions as to the
refractive change that will be induced by the
choice of the BOZR. This can be summarized as:
2. Keep the BOZO and TR constant, and modify
the BOZR.
As has been shown previously, this concept is
limited by the inability to control the variations in
CF for different corneal shapes, with a resultant
variability in results.
The third and final method of lens design is to
standardize the fitting by making the tear layer
profile constant for all eye shapes. This can be
summarized as follows:
3. The lens is specified in terms of TLT at the
corneal apex and the edge of the BOZO. A
computer program then calculates the
BOZR/TR combination that will fulfill the
specification.
This is the basic concept behind the BE design.
A common question is: why use a constant tear
layer profile? The answer can be best described in
a single word: standardization. The development
of the sag fitting philosophy was based on the
simple concept that different lens designs
behaved differently on corneas of varying shapes,
and that the "ideal" contact lens fit should have a
fluorescein pattern, movement, and centration
properties that could be duplicated irrespective of
corneal shape.
As a result, the shape of the tear layer profile
became the method of standardizing the design

=== PAGE 95 ===

94 ORTHOKERATOLOGY
1. The BOZR is the first curve chosen due to the
required refractive change (Fig. 4.27A).
2. The second curve chosen is the alignment
curve, as the overall sag of the lens must equal
the corneal sag at the point of contact with the
alignment curve (Fig. 4.27B).
3. The final curve chosen is the RC. Note that the
RC is responsible for joining the BOZR to the
alignment curve in order that the require­
ments of sag fitting are fulfilled (Fig. 4.27C).
Figure 4.27 The constructionof afour-zonelens based
on theJessen factor.The back optic zone radius (BOZR) is
determinedfirst, dependingon therefractivechange
required.This is shown in (A). The second curve chosen is
the alignmentcurve (AC), shown in (B). The reverse curve
(C) isthe final curve chosen to bringaboutsagittal
equivalencyand join the BOZR to the AC. Courtesyof
PatrickCaroline.
and the fit of the lens. With the BE design, the
TLT at the BOZO is constant irrespective of
corneal shape. The refractive change is controlled
by manipulating the apical clearance. The BOZR
is not based on the Jessen concept, but still has an
effect on the refractive change due to the change
in BOZR with apical clearance.
If a lens is constructed using the first philo­
sophy stated above, the choice of curves is as
follows.
In the case of three-curve lenses, the BOZR can
still be fitted according to the Jessen factor, but
the RC will then be dependent on the corneal
eccentricity. If the two are linked, as with the
Contex lenses, then the sag of both curves needs
to be equal to the corneal sag at the edge of
the RC.
When a lens is constructed using the constant
tear layer profile technique, the order of curve
choice is reversed. The construction is as follows:
1. The alignment curve or tangent is derived
from the axial radius of curvature of the
cornea at the point of contact with the surface
(Fig. 4.28A).
2. The RC is chosen to give the required TLT at
the edge of the BOZO (Fig. 4.28A).
3. The BOZR is then calculated so that the curve
meets the requirements of the apical clearance
and the depth of the tear layer at the BOZO
(Fig.4.28B).
At first glance, these different techniques may
appear to have little in common, except that they
are all based on sag fitting and must obey the
same rules in order for the fit to be correct.
This is the simple point that needs to be
remembered. All reverse geometry lenses, irre-
A B
Figure 4.28 Constructionof a lens based on tearlayer thickness.(A) The alignmentcurve or tangent ischosen first,
based on corneal data. The reverse curve is thencalculatedto givea specifictear layerthicknessat the back optic zone
diameter.The back optic zone radius is the finalcurve calculatedbased on the apical clearancerequired and is shown in
(B). Courtesyof PatrickCaroline.


=== PAGE 96 ===

DESIGN VARIABLES AND FITTING PHILOSOPHIESOF REVERSE GEOMETRY LENSES 95
RelationshipbetweenBOZR and clearancefactor
Relationshipbetweenflatnessof fit (Fa- BOZR) andTRcurve
Figure 4.29 Relationshipbetween flatnessof fit of back
optic zone radius (BOZRj to the clearancefactor of OK
704T lenses.The corneal data isRo 7.80, eccentricity0.50.
spective of fitting philosophy or design varia­
tions, have the same basic construction and must
be fitted according to sag philosophy if the fit of
the lens is to be optimal. Where much of the
variation in fitting success with the lenses occurs
is in the assumptions made by various manufac­
turers as to the underlying corneal shape. If the
lenses are empirically fitted from K readings and
refraction, then the assumed corneal shape will
be a prime area for inaccuracy when compared to
the actual corneal shape. These variations are
covered in Chapter 6.
As shown above, all reverse geometry lenses
follow the same pattern of construction that is
primarily based on the lens having a sagittal
relationship to the cornea. The difference in
TLT at the corneal apex and the edge of the
BOZO (the CF) can therefore be used to exam­
ine further the similarities and differences in
designs.
The definition of lens design based on the CF
concept can be used to find the relationship
between the fit of the lens with respect to the
corneal curve and the associated steepening of
the RC that is required to maintain sagittal
equivalency with the cornea. In the case of the
Contex lenses, if the BOZO of the lens is kept con­
stant and the TO varied, the width of the TR
curve is altered, as the peripheral curve width of
all the OK series is constant depending on the
design used. The Oreimlens has a constant TR
width of 0.60 mrn, and the El Hage TR curve
varies with the TO of the lens and the BOZO
Figure 4.30 Relationshipbetweenflatnessof fit and
reversecurve steepening.TR, tear reservoir;BOZR, back
optic zone radius.
chosen. In the case of a cornea of Ro 7.80 mm and
e 0.50 fitted with a 10.60 mm diameter Contex
OK704T, the relationship between the CF and the
difference between the BOZR and corneal curve
(Ro) is shown in Figure 4.29. For the sake of sim­
plicity, the difference between the BOZR and Ro
will be described in terms of "flatness of fit" and
converted to diopters. As the CF is increased, the
BOZR is flattened in a linear relationship to the
clearance factor.
Figure 4.30 shows the same relationship,
except the steepening of the RC with respect to
the BOZR (in diopters) is used instead of the CF.
Once again, there is a linear relationship between
the two in that, if a specific BOZR is chosen for
an individual eye, it must have a specific RC in
order to maintain sagittal equivalency of fit.
However, the relationship between these two
factors also varies depending on the width of the
RC that forms the TR. Figure 4.31 shows the vari­
ation in steepening of the TR curve with three
different RC widths, 0.30, 0.60, and 0.90 mm. If
the BOZR is predetermined, then the steepening
of the TR curve is also linked linearly to the
width of the TR curve.
The effect of variations in CF on corneal shape
and refractive change has been studied in a con­
trolled experiment by fitting a group of six sub­
jects with lenses of varying CFs (Bara 2000). Each
of the subjects wore a lens with a specific change
in CF for a period of 6 h, with a J-week interval


=== PAGE 97 ===

96 ORTHOKERATOlOGY
Relationshipbetweenflatnessof fit (Fo- BOZRI and TR curve(TR·BOZRj
fordifferentTR curve widths
Figure 4.31 Relationshipbetween back optic zone
radius and reverse curve (RC) for varying RC band widths.
TR, tear reservoir,BOZR, back optic zone radius.
between episodes. A control group was used for
comparison. The CF variations were 30, 50, and
80 urn, with a BOZO of 7.00 mm and a tangential
peripheral curve. The TO was varied during the
trial wear periods to maximize centration. The
changes in apical radius, eccentricity, visual
acuity (log minimum angle of resolution or
logMAR) and apical corneal power were meas­
ured at 'l-h intervals during the 6-h wear period.
The change in apical radius for the treatment
and control groups for the different CF lenses is
shown in Figure 4.32A. The relationships between
the lens design and change in eccentricity and
visual acuity are shown in Figure 4.32B and C.
The lens with the deepest CF (6.000 reverse
curve) showed the greater and faster effect when
compared to the other designs and the control
group. The interesting fact to note with the results
is that the refractive change appears to be related
Figure 4.32 The change in (A) apical radius Ro' (B)
eccentricity,and (C) log minimum angle of resolution
(logMAR) vision for a group of subjectsfitted with lenses
where the RC is 2.00, 4.00, and 6.00Dsteeperthan the
BOZR. All lenses arefitted accordingto sag philosophy.
The lens that caused the greatestchange whencompared
to the controlsis the6.00 D lens. The 2.00D lens changes
were not statistically different to thecontrols.Courtesyof
Christa Sara.
to the BOZR, in that greater CF values are asso­
ciated with a flatter BOZR.
This is the single factor that all reverse geo­
metry designs have in common, irrespective of
the fitting philosophy used. The EI Hage, Reim,


=== PAGE 98 ===

DESIGN VARIABLES AND FITTING PHILOSOPHIESOF REVERSE GEOMETRY LENSES 97
RelationshipbetweenBOZR and TR curvesfor10.00mm Orelmlens
Figure 4.33 Relationshipbetween back optic zone
radius (0) and reverse curve (0) for Oreimlens.The corneal
data are Ro 7.80, eccentricity0.50. TR, tear reservoir;FTK
flatter than K.
and other philosophies are based on the selection
of the BOZR as determined by the initial refract­
ive error. The only difference between them is the
amount of extra flattening used as a compression
factor. However, most designs are also based on
a peripheral alignment curve that contacts the
peripheral cornea and are based on corneal
shape, indicating constancy in the sag relation­
ship between the lens and cornea.
In the following examples, the standard cornea
of R o 7.80 mm and e 0.50 is fitted using both
philosophies. The refractive error range is from
1.00 0 to 4.00 0 in 0.50 0 steps. Both lenses are
assumed to touch the cornea centrally, with a TLT
of zero.
In the case of the Oreimlens, the BOZR is equal
to (F o - Rx) - 0.75 0, with a 6.00 mm BOZO,
0.60 mm TR width, and 10.00 mm TO. The rela­
tionship between the BOZR (in effect, flatness of fit
in diopters) and TR curves for the different refrac­
tive error corrections is shown in Figure 4.33. Note
that, once again, there is a linear relationship
between the BOZR and the TR curves. Similarly,
there is a linear relationship between the BOZR
and the clearance factor (Fig. 4.34).
El Hage's BOZR is equal to (Ro- 0.2) x Rx, with
the CF at the edge of the TR calculated by adding
the difference in sag between the initial prefit cor­
neal shape and the BOZR of the lens over the same
chord. The CF is determined by adding an allow-
RelationshipbetweenBOZR and clearancefactorfor10.00mm Orelmlens
Figure 4.34 Relationshipbetween lens fit (back optic
zone radius) and clearancefactor.
RelationshipbetweenBOZR and clearancefactorfor EI Hage lens
(10.00mm TO)
Figure 4.35 Relationshipbetween back optic zone
radius (BOZR) and clearancefactor for EI Hage's lens.
ance of 12 urn per diopter of refractive change at
the 7.00 mm zone. Figure 4.35 shows the relation­
ship between flatness of fit and the CF for a
10.0 mm diameter lens. As with the other reverse
geometry lenses, the relationship is linear.
In effect, the main difference between the two
designs is that the clearance factor per diopter of
flattening is 13 j.Lm/1.00D for the Oreimlens, and
21 j.Lm/1.000 for the El Hage design. The dis­
parity in the two is due to the difference in TR
curve widths and the flatter BOZR used by Reim,
but regression analysis shows a linear relation­
ship between the two (Fig. 4.36).


=== PAGE 99 ===

98 ORTHOKERATOlOGY
Relationshipbetween clearancefactorsfor the
EIHage andDreimlens
Clearancefactor(um) EIHage
Figure 4.36 The relationshipbetween the clearance
factors(Cfs]of the Dreimlensand EI Hage lenses is linear.
The differencebetween the two is dueto the extra
compressionfactor of 0.75 Dused in the Reim design.
The above analysis shows that, irrespective of
the fitting philosophy or the basic lens design,
there is a direct and essential relationship
between the flatness of fit of the lens and the
degree of steepening of TR curve, and both
factors are dependent on the CF. In effect, for any
given BOZR, there will only be one TR curve
at a specific CF that will fulfill the sag fitting
requirements for an individual corneal shape.
It is this constancy of the relationship between
the BOZR and the RC that led to the assump­
tion of a "dose-response" RC relationship
between the refractive change and the CF at the
BOZD.
In effect this is a circular argument. The rea­
soning is that the BOZR is directly related to the
required refractive change. For any given corneal
shape, a lens fitted x D flatter than the cornea will
have a specific tear layer depth (CF) at a BOZD of
6.00 mm. The depth of the tear layer determines
the curvature of the RC in order to maintain
sagittal equivalency. This will therefore yield
a linear relationship between the RC and the
refractive change, but since the argument is based
on the initial supposition that the BOZR controls
the refractive change, the whole concept becomes
a circular argument. As Bara has shown, the CF
appears to control the refractive change. The CF
also determines the RC if the BOZR is preset, and
the BOZR if the RC is preset.
Does the BOZR control the refractive
change?
The controlled studies of the traditional ortho­
keratology techniques (Kerns 1976, Brand et al
1983, Coon 1984) all found no correlation
between the BOZR of the lens and the refractive
error correction or the final corneal shape.
However, with the introduction of the four- and
five-zone lens designs, the Jessen factor once
again became the dominant means of program­
ming the refractive change required. However, to
date there have been no controlled studies that
prove that such a relationship exists. The
assumption is that the epithelium will mold itself
in a 1:1 relationship to the BOZR of the lens.
Therefore, if the BOZR is set at the required
refractive change, the cornea will mold to it. This
concept appears to have some variations in that
different lens designs will use different "com­
pression factors" added to the initial Jessen
factor. The Reim design has an extra 0.75 D
flattening, whereas the R&R design is 0.50 D and
the Fargo 1.00 D.
If the BOZR of the lenses used had a direct
"molding effect" on the cornea, there should be a
good correlation between the base curve of the
lens used and the change in refraction induced by
the lens. To test this hypothesis, the correlation
between change in apical corneal power and
"flatness of fit" (Fa - BOZR in diopters) and the
calculated BOZR for four lens designs were
analyzed using regression analysis. The lens used
in the study was the Contex OK704T, but since it
is assumed that the primary influence on refrac­
tive change is the BOZR, an assumption could be
made that any lens that met the requirements of a
correct sagittal relationship to the cornea would
produce the same result. The results are shown in
Figure 4.37.
There is a high correlation (r2 = 0.80, P < 0.0001,
df 59) for the relationship between the constant
tear layer profile fit (IDEAL) and a poorer relation­
ship for the 704T fit (r2 = 0.50, P < 0.0001, df 59).
However, the correlation is definitely not 1:1.If the
BOZR had a direct molding effect on the epithe-


=== PAGE 100 ===

DESIGN VARIABLES AND FITTING PHILOSOPHIESOF REVERSE GEOMETRY LENSES 99
RelationshipbetweenchangeInapicalcornealpowerand lens fit (EI Hage)
A
RelationshipbetweenchangeInapical cornealpowerand lens fit IDEAL
Relationshipbetweenchangein apicalcornealpowerand
lens fit (Drelmlens)
B
RelationshipbetweenchangeInapicalcornealpowerand lensfit (OK704T)
C 0
Figure 4.37 (A) Relationshipbetween back optic zone radius (BOZR) and refractivechange using the EI Hage model.
(B) Relationshipbetween BOZR and refractivechange using the Reim model. (C) Relationshipbetween BOZR and
refractivechange using a constanttear layer model. (D) Relationshipbetween BOZR and refractivechange using the
OK704.
lium, the regression line would be at a 45° angle
between the x- and y-axes. The correlation for the
fitting philosophies based on a predetermined
BOZR is much poorer: Reim (r2 = 0.19, P = 0.0004,
df 59) and El Hage (r2 = 0.24, P = 0.Q1, df 59). Once
again, there appears to be no direct molding effect.
The results of fitting a group of subjects with the
aim of a 4.00 0 reduction in myopia is shown in
Figure 4.38. As can be seen from the results, there
is a wide variation in outcome with respect to the
final refraction, indicating that there is some
unpredictability in the approach.


=== PAGE 101 ===

100 ORTHOKERATOlOGY
Differencebetweenaimed forandachievedRxchange(4.000Aim)
Figure 4.38 The achieved refractivechangescomparedto the aim of 4.00 Dfor agroup of 131 subjects.The refractive
change was based on theback optic zone radiusof the lens. Courtesyof Tom Reim.
~elatlonshlp betweenchangeInapicalcornealpowerandrefractivechange
(Munnerlynsmodel)
Relationshipbetweenchange Inapicalcornealpowerandchange
Incornealsag (5.00 mm chord)
A B
Figure 4.39 (A) Relationshipbetweenchange in corneal sag (5.00 mm chord) and refractivechange. (B) Relationship
between refractivechange and that calculatedfrom Munnerlyn'sformula overthe central 5.00mm chord.
EI Hage assumes a 10 f.LID difference in corneal
sag per diopter of refractive change. Is this correct?
Essentially, the answer is "yes." In Chapter 8, the
mathematical modeling of orthokeratology is
approached from the viewpoint of epithelial
changes researched by Swarbrick et al (1998). As
part of her analysis, Swarbrick utilized a sugges­
tion by Patrick Caroline that Munnerlyn's formula


=== PAGE 102 ===

DESIGN VARIABLES AND FITTING PHILOSOPHIESOF REVERSE GEOMETRY LENSES 101
RelationshipbetweenchangeInapicalcornealpowerandpost-wearcornea/lenstearlayervolume
A
Relationshipbetweenchangeinapicalcornealpowerandpost-wearcornea/lenstearlayervolume
B
Figure 4.40 (A) Relationshipbetweenchange in tear layervolume and refractivechange using the Reim and EI Hage
model. (B) The relationshipbetween refractivechange and tear layervolume for the constantTLT model and the EZM
and 704models.The correlationisgood for the constantTLT model.
(Munnerlyn et a11988)for refractive surgery could
be used as a means of assessing refractive changes
in orthokeratology. Munnerlyn's formula states:
Ablation depth = (Rx D2)/8 (n -1)
where Rx is the refractive change required, D the
diameter of the ablation zone, and n the refractive
index of the cornea (1.377). From the orthokera­
tology context, ablation depth can be interpreted
as sag change from the initial corneal shape to the


=== PAGE 103 ===

102 ORTHOKERATOLOGY
final corneal shape, and D the area of corneal
flattening induced by the lens.
The change in corneal sag over a 5.00 mm chord
as a result of orthokeratologic treatment was cal­
culated for a group of 60 patients. The difference in
sag was calculated using the initial Roand e values
taken from corneal topographical data and sub­
tracting the final, posttreatment sag using the
"final" Ro value and an eccentricity of zero. The
relationship between refractive change and sag
change is shown in Figure 4.39a. There is a high
correlation between the two (r2 = 0.98, P < 0.0001,
df 59), with the regression form indicating a sag
change of 8 urn per diopter of refractive change.
This is relatively close to the 10 urn assumed by El
Hage. Similarly, the relationship between actual
measured change in apical corneal power and the
predicted change using Munnerlyn's model is
highly statistically significant (r2 = 0.98, P < 0.0001,
df 59), and is shown in Figure 4.39B.
Finally, a further refinement of the model can
be used to determine if there is any "molding con­
stant" based on the different fitting philosophies.
If it is assumed that the choice of BOZR in some
way determines the final corneal shape induced
by the lens, then there should be a correlation
between the final volume relationshipbetween the
tear volume under the lens and the altered corneal
shape, and the refractive change induced. The
Relationshipbetweenchangeinapicalcornealpowerand
cornealvolumeInorlhokeratology
change in apical corneal power represents the
refractive change induced by the shape or volume
change in the cornea over the 5.00 mm chord.
The regression analysis of the calculated
volume differences between the cornea and the
El Hage and Dreimlens postlens tear volumes
and the measured change in apical corneal power
is shown in Figure 4.40A. The results are quite
surprising, as there is no correlation between
corneal power change and the volume differences
with the El Hage (r2 = 0.09, P = 0, df 59) and Reim
(r2 = 0.08, P = 0, df 59) models, indicating that the
choice of BOZR does not induce a predetermined
degree of corneal power change. However, the
correlations between the change in apical corneal
power and the postwear tear volume difference
for the constant TLT lens and the OK704 are
shown in Figure 4.40B. The correlation is surpris­
ingly good (r2 = 0.90, P < 0.0001, df 59) for the
constant TLT lens, and poor for the 704 (r2 = 0.03,
P = 0, df 59). The OK704 result is similar to the
El Hage and Reim relationship, indicating a basic
flaw in the concept of the lens/ cornea fitting rela­
tionship. The difference between the constant TLT
fitting concept and the others is the use of a
constant tear layer profile irrespective of initial
corneal shape. El Hage and Reim set the BOZR as
the basis of lens construction, whilst the OK704
and EZM set the TR curve as the fixed basis of
Relationshipbetweenchangeincornealeccentricityandchangein
cornealvolumeinorlhokeratology(5.00 mm chord)
A B
Figure 4.41 (A) The relationshipbetween corneal volume change and eccentricity.(B) The relationshipbetween
refractivechange and corneal volume. .


=== PAGE 104 ===

DESIGN VARIABLES AND FITTING PHILOSOPHIESOF REVERSE GEOMETRY LENSES 103
lens design. In all of these cases, the CF will vary
with the corneal shape.
The BOZR of the constant TLT lens is based on
the relationship between the tear layer profile and
the corneal shape remaining constant. The rela­
tionship between the final corneal shape, which
causes the refractive changes, and the tear layer
volume difference between the lens and the
cornea is governed by the change in corneal
shape, which is dependent on the change in
eccentricity from a prolate ellipse to a sphere. The
unifying factor between the tear layer volume
pre- and postwear is the change in corneal eccen­
tricity.
The relationship between corneal eccentricity
change and corneal volume change (Fig. 4.41A) is
statistically significant (r2 = 0.86, P < 0.0001, df 59),
as is the relationship between refractive change
and tear volume change (r 2 = 0.96, P < 0.0001,
df 59), as shown in Figure 4.41B.
The analysis shows that there is no direct rela­
tionship between the BOZR of the lens and the
induced refractive change, meaning that the
fitting concepts of El Hage, Reim, Mountford,
and others of either a predetermined BOZR
or TR curve are flawed. There is, however, a
good correlation between the BOZR based on the
constant tear layer profile concept and the refrac­
.tive changes seen. This does not mean that lenses
fitted according to the Jessen factor do not work:
it simply means that the fitting concept is not
validated by the analysis of the data. The reason
why the choice of a BOZR based on the refractive
change required actually does work as an ortho­
keratology lens will be discussed in greater detail
in Chapter lf), but the results of the above analy­
sis show that the margin for error of assuming a
1:1 molding relationship between the BOZR of
the lens and the final corneal shape,. or a
modification of it, is high.
The constant-surface-areaconcept
Both the Fargo and Euclid lenses base the lens
design on the assumption that the corneal surface
area remains constant and is not altered by ortho­
keratology treatment. Smolek & Klyce (1998)
have shown by topographical analysis that
corneal surface area is in fact constant for all
corneal conditions except keratoglobus. However,
it appears that the constant-surface-area concept
is applied to orthokeratology as a reflection of the
law of the conservation of corneal power argu­
ment, as proposed by Caroline & Campbell
(1991).
The Fargo and Euclid lenses derive the BOZR
of the lens based on the Jessen factor, with a mild
difference between compression factors. The
reverse curve is then calculated such that the
surface area (SA) of the pretreatment cornea is
equal to the surface area of the BOZR and RCs.
Day et al (1997) use the example of a cornea
with 46.00 0 apical power and an eccentricity of
0.47 having a surface area of 59.00 mm- over a
treatment diameter of 8.30 mm (BOZO plus BP0 1) .
The surface area of the BOZO of the lens used is
then subtracted from the initial corneal surface
area. The difference is then the surface area of the
RC. The example given is that 42.50 0 BOZR over
a 6.00 mm BOZO has a surface area of 29.36 mm-.
In order for the surface area to remain constant, the
RC must have a surface area of 29.64 mm-, or a
curve of 45.50 0 or 3.00 0 steeper than the BOZR.
Kwok (1984) gives the formula for the surface
area of a rotationally symmetrical aspheric
surface as:
S = (II/1 + Q){R2- (R-s-sQ)[(R-sQ)2 + S2QJ1/2­
[(R2I (-Q-Q2)1/2][sin-1- QI/2 (R-s-sQ) IR­
sirr ' _ Q1/2]}
where R is the apical radius, s is sag, and Q is
asphericity.
The surface area of a spherical surface is:
SA= 211 Rs
where R is the radius and s is the sag of the sphere.
If the data of Day are used (Ro = 7.33 and
Q = 0.211), the calculated corneal surface area
over a chord of 8.30 mm is 59.00 mm-. The total
surface area of the lens follows the same mathe­
matical rules as the sag calculations in that:
Total SA = SA R1I0 1+ (SA R21O2- SA R210 1)+
(SA R3/ 0 3 - SA R31O2 )
The original concept was developed for use with
three-zone lenses, such that the RC came into
contact with the corneal surface at a.total chord of
8.30 mm. The total surface area of the lens was then

=== PAGE 105 ===

104 ORTHOKERATOLOGY
Figure 4.42 The tear layerprofileof a four-zone lens on
a standard cornea with a back optic zone radius (BOZRj
fitted 3.50 Dflatter than flat- K.
29.36 mm- (surface area of BOZO) plus 29.63mm­
(surface area of the RC zone), giving a total lens
surface area of 58.99mm-. The calculations show
that the surface areas match within the limitations
of the figures used (two decimal places).
Figure 4.42 shows the tear layer profile of a
four-zone lens on a standard cornea with a BOZR
fitted 3.500 flatter than flat-K. In this case, the
lens is assumed to have zero apical clearance, and
the RC meets the corneal surface at the junction
of the RC and alignment curve. The SA of the
cornea at a chord of 7.20 mm is 42.34 mm-, and
the SA of the lens is 43.38 mm-. Once again, given
the limitations of the calculations, the results are
in close agreement.
In Figure 4.43, a generic four-zone lens is
shown fitted to the standard cornea. The common
area of contact is now over a chord of 9.20 mm,
and the SA of the cornea is 79.55 mm-. The total
SA of the lens is 80.75 mm- over the same chord.
The technique shows close agreement for basi­
cally all correct combinations of back surface
geometry if the lens is constructed using sag
calculations.
However, the choice of RC and alignment
curves is once again secondary to the selection of
the BOZR based on variations of the Jessen factor.
As has been shown previously, for any given
corneal shape there is only one combination of
RC and alignment curve that will satisfy the
Figure 4.43 A genericfour-zone lens is shown fitted to
the standardcornea.
requirements of sag fitting. SA calculations are a
complex extension to the sag philosophy, and
both are totally dependent on corneal shape.
The fact that the SAs of the cornea and the lens
match is a derivative of the sags matching, and
not, as one would tend to assume, due to a 1:1
molding relationship between the lens and the
cornea.
ACCURACY OF SAG FITTING
Bara (2000)noticed during the course of her study
that there appeared to be a relationship between
the apical radius and eccentricity value and the
BOZR of the lens, in that the BOZR was approx­
imately equal to the R o in millimeters and the
numeric value of the eccentricity. If Ro was 7.80
and e 0.50, the BOZR was approximately 8.30 mm.
This led to the systematic evaluation of the sag
philosophy and the traditional "flatter-than-K"
fitting technique and the relationship to the Ro + e
methods for predicting the correct BOZR. The
data used for analysis had been previously pub­
lished (Mountford 1997b), where a group of
60 patients who had successfully completed a
course of orthokeratology were fitted with
OK704T lenses. The differences in the final lens
parameters used were compared to the BOZR
indicated by the sag calculations, the flatter­
than-K approach, and the Ro+ e approximation.


=== PAGE 140 ===

140 ORTHOKERATOLOGY
systems based solely on this technique are the BE
and EZM designs.
It is generally acknowledged that fitting ortho­
keratology lenses is fairly complex and requires a
high degree of accuracy and skill. The assessment
of the three techniques will be considered with
this in mind.
EMPIRICAL FITTING
Maruna et al (1989) found that approximately
50% of all contact lens practitioners order rigid
gas-permeable (RGP) lenses empirically, i.e.,
with no trial lens fitting. The difference in
success rates between empirical and trial lens
fitting was studied by Bennett et al (1989), with
results that are especially relevant to orthokera­
tology fitting. They found a much higher first-fit
success rate with trial lens fitting, with the
reorder rate for empirically fitted lenses being
twice that of the trial lens group. Bennett &
Sorbara (2000) make the following strong recom­
mendations to practitioners who prefer to fit
empirically:
1. The use of the manufacturer's recommended
fitting guide in combination with having a
sound knowledge of lens design to make an
educated decision is essential. Sufficientexperi­
ence with spherical RGP fitting should be
obtained initially before empirically ordering
lenses. Specialtyfits, including bifocal,toric and
irregular cornea lens designs (and orthokerato­
logy?)shouldalwaysbediagnosticallyfitted. [Italics
are authors.]
2. As the cornea is aspheric and complex in its
topography and because it varies in shape
from patient to patient, the use of videokerato­
graphy is important if empirical fitting is to be
performed.
There are two major points in Bennett & Sorbara's
list that require some expansion with respect to
reverse geometry lens (RGL) fitting. Firstly, they
recommend a thorough knowledge of the manu­
facturer's design, so that some logical decisions
can be made in order to rectify the fit if it is not
ideal. This is simply not possible with the major­
ity of RGLs, as the reverse and alignment curves
are considered by the manufacturer to be "pro-
prietary" information. If the practitioner doesn't
know the curves, then the decisions as to what
curves need to be modified in order to correct a
problem are left to the manufacturer.
Secondly, if empirical fitting is to be carried
out, then Bennett & Sorbara recommend that
corneal topography is essential. This is valid
assuming that the manufacturer knows anything
about topography, and how to use the data to
design a lens more accurately. In most cases,
according to the author's experience with empiri­
cally fitted RGLs, the only topography data used
by the manufacturer are the simulated K read­
ings, thereby negating any value that the topogra­
phy data may give with respect to the real corneal
shape.
Guillon & Sammons (1994) place major empha­
sis on three factors that are essential to the lens
design process: safety, comfort, and vision. Safety
is measured in terms of the ability of the lens to
supply adequate oxygen to the cornea, and also
in the use of design criteria that limit areas of
concentrated mechanical stress on the corneal
surface. Comfort is determined by the fitting rela­
tionship of the lens curves to the corneal surface,
as well as the quality of lens finish with respect to
edge and transition blending. Vision is the
product of the relationship between the lens
design, tear lens power, and the patient's refract­
ive error.
RGL fitting is even more complex due to the
lens design and accuracy required for a successful
outcome (Bara 2000). This therefore seems to
indicate that the first-fit success rate with em­
pirically prescribed lenses would be even lower
than that achieved with standard lenses. Poorly
fitting spherical lenses may, at worst, cause dis­
comfort and irritation, but a poorly fitting RGL
can cause either marked central corneal staining
if fitted too flat, or, conversely, major binding if
fitted too tight (see later). The increased risk of
serious corneal infection from corneal staining, as
demonstrated by the high incidence of problems
in China (11 cases), should be of major concern to
all those who try to fit orthokeratology lenses
empirically (Lu et aI2001).
There are basically three methods used by
manufacturers to design lenses empirically for
orthokeratology.

=== PAGE 141 ===

TRIAL LENS FITTING 141
Table 6.1 The variationin apical radiusvalue with
changingeccentricityassumingaf1at-Kvalue of
7.76 mm (43.50 D)
the flat-K value and an assumed eccentricity will
be examined in detail in the following example.
A practitioner sends the laboratory the follow­
ing data and asks for a lens to be made. The
manufacturer designs the lens on the following
basis. The BOZR of the lens is assumed to be
equal to the refractive change required plus an
extra 0.50 0 as a compression factor. The design is
a four-curve lens, with a back optic zone diameter
(BOZO) of 6.00 mm, a reverse curve width of
0.60 mm, an alignment curve that is 1.00 mm
wide that meets the reverse curve with a tear
layer thickness of 10 urn. The edge lift is a simple
10.00 mm curve 0.40 mm wide. The apical clear­
ance of the lens is presumed to be 5 urn.
The data supplied to the lab are Flat-K 43.500,
and the refractive change required -3.00 O.
Since the corneal eccentricity was not specified,
the manufacturer automatically assumes that it is
0.50 for the sake of calculations. The lens would
therefore have the following specifications:
BOZR =43.50 0 - 3.00 0 - 0.50 0 =40.00 0 =
8.43 mm
This equates to the flat-K minus the Rx change
required (3.00 D) minus the compression factor
of 0.50 0, leaving a final BOZR of 40.00 0 or
8.43 mm. The exact lens specifications and the
tear layer profile of the lens are shown in
Figure 6.1, and are based on an assumption that
flat-K is equal to RD.
1. The lens has standard curves, with the back
optic zone radius (BOZR) fitted 1.50-2.50 0
flatter than the flat-K (Contex OK series).
2. The BOZR is based on the basis of the change
in refraction required with an allowance for an
extra "compression factor" of between 0.50
and 1.00 O. If the laboratory is only supplied
with K readings, the eccentricity is assumed to
be 0.50 (Oreimlens, CRT, Correctech, Emerald,
Contex BB, Fargo).
3. The results of one topography reading are sent
to the lab, and a lens design based on the data
is made (Euclid Jade). Alternatively, the practi­
tioner uses a specific computer program
linked directly to the topographer as an aid to
lens design (WAVE).
The sag-based fitting approach, as outlined in
Chapter 4, as well as the work of Bara (2000)
shows the inaccuracies that can occur if the first
method is used. Mountford et al (2002) have
shown that basing a lens design on the flat-K and
an assumed eccentricity of 0.5 also leads to inac­
curacies. The two values needed to design a lens
based on the sag philosophy are the apical radius
(Ro) and the eccentricity (e) or elevation at the
common chord of contact between the lens and
the cornea. The flat-K is not equal to the apical
radius. The apical radius is the instantaneous
radius of curvature at the corneal apex, and
contains elements of both the steep and flat
meridian. Depending on the degree of corneal
astigmatism, and the eccentricity of the cornea, Ro
can be significantly steeper than flat-K. Table 6.1
shows the difference between Ro and flat-K with
varying eccentricities, assuming a nonastigmatic
cornea. If astigmatism is present, the difference is
greater for increasing degrees of astigmatism.
If the flat-K is used, and the eccentricity is
known, the apical radius for nonastigmatic sur­
faces is calculated from the following formula
(Oouthwaite 1995):
Ro= --JR/ + y2p_ y2
where Ro is apical radius, R, axial radius at the
nominated chord, y is the half-chord (1.5 mm for
the keratometer), and p is (1- e2 ) .
The accuracy of the assumptions used to gen­
erate an empirical lens design simply based on
Eccentricity
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Flat-K(R.)
7.76
7.76
7.76
7.76
7.76
7.76
7.76
7.76
7.76
7.76
Apical radius (Ro)
7.76000
7.75855
7.754199
7.746941
7.736769
7.723671
7.707633
7.688634
7.666655
7.641669

=== PAGE 142 ===

142 ORTHOKERATOLOGY
As can be seen from Table 6.1 Ro is only equal
to flat-K if the eccentricity is zero. The actual
value for Ro when flat-K is 7.76 mm and the
eccentricity is 0.5 is 7.72 mm. If the same lens
details are then fitted to the cornea with the Roset
at 7.72 and an eccentricity of 0.5, the tear layer
profile and the fit of the lens will vary. The tear
layer profile of the original lens parameters on
the actual corneal shape is shown in Figure 6.2.
Note that the calculated lens parameters result in
a lens that is too flat, with zero apical clearance
and no peripheral touch in the alignment curve
zone. This lens will commonly decenter super­
iorly until a tear layer under the lens is formed
that causes the appropriate squeeze film and
Figure 6.1 Lens parameters
andtear layerprofile for a
lenswhere Ro is assumed to
beequal to flat-K.
Figure 6.2 The lens
calculatedin the example
fitted to the eye with the
actual Ro value of 7.72 mm
instead of flat-K 7.76mm.
Note that the lens is too flat,
with zero apical clearance,
and noperipheralcontact.
This lens would decenter
superiorlyand cause a
smiley-facepostwear
topographyplot.
surface tension forces required for a stable fit
(Hayashi 1977, Guillon & Sammons 1994).
The mean corneal eccentricity in the popula­
tion is approximately 0.50, with a standard devia­
tion of 0.15, so as a comparison in the above
example, it will be assumed that the patient did
not have an eccentricity of 0.5, but either 0.35 or
0.65, one standard deviation either side of the
norm. The tear layer profile of the initial calcu­
lated lens on the 0.35 eccentricity cornea is shown
in Figure 6.3. As with the example above, the lens
design arrived at by the laboratory is too flat for
the corneal shape and will decenter. In both of
these cases, a smiley-face topography plot will
result from wearing the lens (see later), with


=== PAGE 143 ===

induced with-the-rule astigmatism and poor
unaided acuity.
Finally, the eccentricity is assumed to be 0.65,
with a resultant change of apical radius to
7.69 mm. The ordered lens on this cornea will be
far too steep, with approximately 14 urn of apical
clearance and a steep alignment curve (Fig. 6.4).
Steep or tight lenses result in central island post­
wear topography plots, with poor unaided visual
acuity that is usually worse than the initial
unaided visual acuity. The differences between
the reverse curve and alignment curve values and
those supplied by the manufacturer are shown in
Table 6.2. Note that in all cases there are signi­
ficant differences in the curves, and that none of
the lenses are interchangeable.
TRIAL lENS FITTING 143
Figure 6.3 The original lens
parametersfitted to a cornea
with eccentricity0.35. The Ro
of the cornea is 7.74mm,
whereasflat-Kis 7.76mm.
This lens is even flatter than
the last example.There is zero
apical clearance,and
approximately15 um of
clearanceat the alignment
zone. This lens would also
decenter.
Figure 6.4 The original lens on
a cornea with an eccentricityof
0.65. Ro is now7.69 mm. Note
that the apical clearanceis
17 urn, and not the required
5 urn. This lens is toosteep, and
will cause a "centralisland."
If the practitioner is faced with these less than
ideal responses to the lens that was sent, the only
course of action is to contact the laboratory with
the results and ask them to redesign the lens. The
usual method of rectification with most of the
empirically designed lenses is to alter the align­
ment curve. The alignment curve with most four­
curve designs is based on the axial radius of
curvature of the cornea at a chord of 4.60 mm, or
the start of the alignment curve zone. The tear
layer of such a lens is shown in Figure 6.5.
Clinical experience showed that this curve was
too flat, so the value was changed to allow for a
tear layer thickness (TLT)of 10 urn at the junction
of the reverse and alignment curves (Reim 2000).
This, in effect, results in the alignment curve


=== PAGE 144 ===

144 ORTHOKERATOLOGY
Table 6.2 The effect of the actualcorneal shape on
the values for the reverse and alignmentcurves.
Note that in all cases the valuesdiffer significantly
from the curves used, assumingthat Kf is equal to Ro
and that eccentricity is astandard0.50
Corneal BOZR Reverse Alignment Peripheral
data (6.00 mm) curve curve curve
(0.6 mm) (1.0 mm) (0.4 mm)
Kf= 7.76, 8.492 7.034 7.936 10.00
e= 0.5
Ro = 7.72 8.494 7.007 7.898 10.00
e= 0.5
Ro = 7.74 8.494 6.890 7.780 10.00
e =0.35
Ro = 7.69 8.494 7.045 8.047 10.00
e =0.65
BOZR, back opticzone radius.
being approximately 0.05 mm or 0.25 0 steeper
than the calculated Ra• The effect this has on the
tear layer profile is shown in Figure 6.6.
Luk et al (2001) cite various manufacturers'
data and give the following description of the
alignment curve construction. These data have
already been presented in Chapter 4, but warrant
repeating due to the importance in lens fitting.
• If the corneal eccentricity is between 0 and 0.3,
the alignment curve should be equal to the
central flat-K value.
• If the corneal eccentricity is between 0.31 and
0.55, the alignment curve should be 0.25 0
flatter than the flat-K value.
• If the corneal eccentricity is between 0.56 and
0.80, the alignment curve should be 0.50 0
flatter than the flat-K.
These generic values lead to gross errors, as
shown in Table 6.3. Assuming a flat-K of 43.50 0,
and varying eccentricities, the Ra value can be
calculated at a chord of 4.60 mm. The value is
then steepened by a further 0.250, as shown
above. The resultant calculated values of the
alignment curve vary dramatically with chang­
ing eccentricity.
So, what actually happens when the laboratory
alters the alignment curve? In the case of the
cornea with an eccentricity of 0.35 (Fig. 6.3), the
advice would be that the lens was too flat, so
the alignment curve would be steepened. !~e
closest alteration is shown in Figure 6.7. ThIS IS
still not an ideal situation as the depth of the tear
layer at the reverse curve / alignment curve inter­
section is 20 urn, instead of the required 10 urn,
and the alignment curve is in effect too steep. The
practitioner would then try this lens, which may
result in edge compression and binding, or a
central island. The laboratory would be requested
to alter the fit again. This time, since the alter­
ations to the alignment curve didn't work, the
reverse curve and the alignment curve would be
altered. The result is shown in Figure 6.8. At this
Figure 6.5 Tear layer
profileof the lens when
the alignmentcurve is
equal to the apical radius
at achord of 9.20 mm.
Note that the apical
clearanceis0.6 urn, and
that the tearlayer
thicknessat the chord of
9.20 mm is
approximately5 urn,


=== PAGE 145 ===

Table 6.3 The flat-K andcalculatedalignmentcurve
+0.25D are shown.The differencebetween the two
isshown in the third column.The valuescalculated
from corneal data differ markedlyfrom the generic
valuesof the alignmentcurves
Flat-K(D) Alignmentcurve (D) Difference(D)
43.5 43.74227 0.242268
43.5 43.70004 0.200042
43.5 43.5741 0.074097
43.5 43.3666 -0.1334
43.5 43.08105 -0.41895
43.5 42.72212 -0.77788
43.5 42.29544 -1.20456
43.5 41.80739 -1.69261
43.5 41.26483 -2.23517
43.5 40.6749 -2.8251
stage, the tear layer profile is almost exactly
what is required, and the final lens curves are
very similar to those arrived at by calculation
(Table 6.3). However, it has taken three different
lenses to arrive at a lens with similar parameters
to the lens based on actual corneal data.
A similar course of events would occur if the
initial lens was fitted to the 0.65 eccentricity
cornea. The laboratory would be advised that the
lens was too tight, so the first alteration would be
made by flattening the alignment curve. The
result of this is shown in Figure 6.9. In this case,
the alignment curve has been flattened from
TRIAL LENS FITTING 145
Figure 6.6 The effectof
steepeningthe alignmentcurve
by0.05 mm is toincreasethe
apical clearanceto 5 urn, as
well as increasingthe tearlayer
thicknessat the7.20 mm chord
to 10 um,
7.936 mm to 8.05 mm. The usual change in align­
ment curve is 0.25 0 at a time, so once again,
three lenses would be required to arrive at the
correct result that could have been achieved if the
original corneal data were used. Note that in
none of the cases outlined has the BOZR been
altered. The entire fitting philosophy of the lens
is based on a relationship between the BOZR and
the refractive change required, so in effect the
BOZR remains constant.
The preceding examples illustrate that empiri­
cal fitting that is based solely on keratometry data
is inherently inaccurate due to the false assump­
tions made with respect to flat-K being equal to
apical radius and the assumption of a mean eccen­
tricity value of 0.50. Those practitioners who prefer
empirical fitting ought to make certain that they
follow the suggestions of Bennett & Sorbara (2000),
in that the laboratory must be supplied with accu­
rate topography data on which to base the calcula­
tions. The practitioner must also ensure that the
manufacturer uses the data to design the lens, and
not simply the flat-K values and a nominal eccen­
tricity. Even if the lens design and fitting are based
on topography (WAVE, Euclid Jade), errors are still
inherent due to two main factors. Firstly, the lens
fit is usually based on the data from a single topo­
graphy reading, and secondly, errors due to the
reconstruction algorithms used by the topographer
are not taken into account. These factors will
be examined in greater detail in the section on
topography-based fitting (see later).


=== PAGE 146 ===

146 ORTHOKERATOLOGY
Figure 6.7 The effect of
changing(steepening)the
alignmentcurve of the lens
shown in Figure 6.3 to
7.70 mm whilst keeping all
the other curves constant.
This is still a less than
optimal fit, as the alignment
curve is slightly too tight.
Figure 6.8 The reverse
curve has now been
steepenedto 6.85 mm,
and the alignmentcurve
flattened to 7.80 mm. The
lens is nowmuch closer
to the lens caleulated
from actualcorneal data.
Figure 6.9 The lens shown in
Figure 6.4 (eccentricity0.50) has
been altered by flattening the
alignmentcurve from 7.936 to
8.05 mm.


=== PAGE 147 ===

To date, there has been only one report in the
literature comparing the outcomes of empirical
versus trial lens fitting. Fedders et al (1999) meas­
ured the changes in refraction, corneal shape, and
fluorescein pattern appearance in a small group
of subjects (3) following 4 h wear of OK-3 lenses.
The first set of lenses were fitted by supplying the
manufacturer with the K readings and the specta­
cle refraction. The second set were trial-lens-fitted
and the fit altered until an optimal fluorescein
pattern was achieved. The empirical lenses
tended to be flatter in BOZR than the trial-fitted
lenses, and caused less refractive change. The
fluorescein patterns between the lens fits were
very similar, leading to the conclusion that
between fitting methods subtle differences occur
that are not apparent with fluorescein pattern
analysis. Further research into the differences
between the first-fit success rate and corneal
response to the different fitting methods is
required.
Empirical fitting is potentially inefficient, time­
consuming, and expensive when compared to
trial lens fitting with standard spherical RGP
fitting (Bennett et al 1989). It is even less efficient
when applied to reverse geometry fitting.
TRIAL LENS FITTING
The basics of trial lens fitting with RGLs for
orthokeratology is essentially the same as for
normal lens fitting. The practitioner is given a
fitting nomogram by the manufacturer in order to
select the BOZR (base curve) of the initial trial
lens. The nomogram is usually based on a pre­
determined relationship between the BOZR of the
lens and the flat-K reading. The trial lens is then
inserted and the usual tests of fluorescein pattern
analysis and lens movement and centration
carried out. From these data, the practitioner is
then able to prescribe a lens for the patient.
RGLs exhibit a totally different fluorescein
pattern to that of a conventional lens. All current
orthokeratology lenses show essentially the same
fluorescein pattern, an area of "central touch"
that is approximately 3-4 mm in diameter, a
narrow and deep ring of fluorescein (the tear
reservoir) approximately 0.5-1.00 mm wide, a
wide alignment curve (1.00 mrn), and an edge
TRIAL LENS FITTING 147
clearance. It is the appearance of the fluorescein
pattern that has led to the totally false assump­
tion of heavy central bearing with the lenses.
Central bearing is always associated with epithe­
lial insult and the formation of corneal scarring
(Korb et al 1982), or lens decentration. RGLs are
fitted with apical clearance. It is the limitations of
fluorescein pattern analysis that give the appear­
ance of touch.
This has been succinctly stated by UK practi­
tioner Basil Bloom as follows:
At no time during the orthokeratology process
should a properly fitting lens come into direct
contact with the corneal epithelium at the apex.
Such contact will result in epithelial insult
(Bloomunpublished).
TRIAL LENS SETS
There are many different designs of RGL avail­
able, but, as shown in Chapter 4, the basic mathe­
matical relationship between all the designs
means that the fluorescein patterns will all appear
similar. The important factors to take into account
before ordering a trial lens set are:
1. the design
2. the material from which the trial lens set is
made. Is the oxygen transmissibility (Ok/f)
high enough to use for a safe overnight trial?
3. the dimensional stability of the material.
How often will the lenses need to be checked
for warpage and steepening, necessitating
replacement?
4. the cost of the lenses and replacements
5. quality and accuracy of manufacture
6. engraving of the lens or color differences so
the BOZRs are not mixed up
7. Does the set come with complete fitting in­
structions and / or a computer program to aid
in lens selection and design variables?
8. the sagittal difference between successive
lenses in the set.
Various manufacturers offer different combina­
tions of the above variables, but of prime impor­
tance are the quality and accuracy of the trial
lenses, and the dimensional stability of the mate­
rial. For example, trial lenses made from Boston
XO have a higher Dk and appear to be more

=== PAGE 148 ===

148 ORTHOKERATOlOGY
dimensionally stable than those made from
Equalens 2. Mid-Dk materials can produce un­
acceptable degrees of corneal swelling on over­
night trials and should be avoided for use as trial
lenses.
The other important factor to consider is the
logic and thought that have gone into the trial lens
set design. As shown previously, the alignment
curve or tangent is the major means of controlling
lens centration, and varies considerably with
corneal eccentricity. Since the trial lens will be
required to fit a large range of different corneal
shapes, the thought that has gone into varying the
alignment curves or tangents in the set is of major
importance. It is of little value having a trial lens
set where the inaccuracies induced by too great a
difference in relative sag between one lens and the
next steepest or flattest lens renders the trial wear
period invalid. Finally, the trial lens set should
come with a complete set of instructions outlining
lens design variations in order to modify the fit,
and preferably a computer program that the prac­
titioner can use to help choose the initial trial lens
and then modify as necessary.
The corneal response to the lens is totally
dependent on the accuracy of the lens fit, as this is
what determines the tear layer squeeze film pres­
sure and forces that initiate and control the
response (see Ch. 10).If the trial lens set parameter
EqUIvalentsagsfO(eoandeccentrlCitycombinationsaleChOrd of9.20 mm
variables limit the change in tear layer profile to a
minimum of 20 urn (or 0.10 mm BOZR steps), the
results can be - and will be - quite variable.
However, designing a trial lens set for RGLs is
a major task. As stated previously, the common
corneal shape varies in apical radius and eccen­
tricity. Most eyes have an eccentricity in the range
of 0.30-0.70, so the problem with designing a trial
lens set begins with having enough lenses in the
set to fit the range of eccentricities adequately, let
alone the variations in apical radius. Figure 6.10
shows the total combinations of corneal sags at a
chord of 9.20 mm with eccentricities ranging from
0.30 to 0.70 and a range of steep to flat apical
radius values. The colored bands represent differ­
ences in sag of 10 um. Note that for any given
combination of Roand e there is a range of sagittal
equivalent eye shapes. In order to cover this
range of corneal shapes, a 49-piece trial lens set
with a sagittal difference of 10 urn between lenses
would be required.
However, matters are complicated by the addi­
tion of the alignment curve. If an alignment curve
that is 1.00 mm wide and contacts the cornea at a
chord of 9.20 mm with a TLT of 10 urn at the
junction of the reverse curve is required, the
range of lenses increases. The variation in align­
ment curve radius for the range of corneal shapes
is shown in Figure 6.11. Note that there are
Figure 6.10 The range of equivalentsags for
combinationsof Roand eccentricityfrom 7.00
to 8.50 mm. The bands of equal color are
sagittal equivalents.


=== PAGE 149 ===

TRIAL LENS FITTING 149
Relationshipof alignmentcurve radiusto apicalradiusfor
Table 6.4 The parameters of a trial lens set designeddifferenteccentricities
on the alignment curve radius based on the mean
eccentricity value of 0.5. The back optical zone
radius (BOZRj can be preset to a nominal 3.50 D
flatter than Ro•and the reverse curves calculated for
sagittal equivalency.
Ro Trial Alignment Reverse Lens
BOZR curve curve sag
7.00 7.70 7.23 6.400 1.6624
7.05 7.75 7.27 6.425 1.6499
7.10 7.80 7.32 6.450 1.6375
7.15 7.85 7.37 6.475 1.6247
7.20 7.90 7.42 6.500 1.6122
7.25 7.95 7.46 6.525
1.6011
7.30 8.00 7.51 6.550 1.5890
7.35 8.05 7.56 6.575 1.5771
7.40 8.10 7.61 6.600 1.5654
7.45 8.15 7.66 6.625 1.5539
7.50 8.20 7.70 6.650 1.5437
7.55 8.25 7.75 6.675 1.5326
Figure 6.11 The alignmentcurve radius is dependent on 7.60 8.30 7.80 6.700 1.5216
the apical radiusand eccentricity.Alinedrawn parallelto 7.65 8.35 7.85 6.725 1.5109
the x-axisat any alignmentcurvevalueshowsthe Ro and 7.70 8.40 7.90 6.750 1.5003
eccentricityvaluesthat it will fit. 7.75 8.45 7.94 6.775 1.4909
7.80 8.50 7.99 6.800 1.4806
7.85 8.55 8.04 6.825 1.4705
common alignment curves for various eccentrici- 7.90 8.60 8.09 6.850 1.4605
ties. The design of a trial set can be simplified if 7.95 8.65 8.13 6.875 1.4517
the alignment curve radius is based on the mean 8.00 8.70 8.18 6.900 1.4421
eccentricity value of 0.5. The BOZR can be preset 8.05 8.75 8.23 6.925 1.4325
to a nominal 3.50 0 flatter than Ro, and the 8.10 8.80 8.28 6.950 1.4232
reverse curves calculated for sagittal equivalency. 8.15 8.85 8.33 6.975 1.4139
8.20 8.90 8.38 7.000 1.4048The parameters of a trial lens set based on these 8.25 8.95 8.42 7.025 1.3967
assumptions are shown in Table 6.4. Note that 8.30 9.00 8.47 7.050 1.3879
there is an approximate sag difference of 12 urn 8.35 9.05 8.51 7.075 1.3800
between each lens in the series. 8.40 9.10 8.57 7.100 1.3705
In order to fit the closest correct trial lens, the 8.45 9.15 8.62 7.125 1.3620
practitioner simply needs either to extract the 8.50 9.20 8.67 7.150 1.3537
corneal elevation value at a chord of 9.20 mm 8.55 9.25 8.71 7.175 1.3462
from the topographer, or alternatively calculate 8.60 9.30 8.76 7.200 1.3381
the value from the apical radius and eccentricity
values. Once the corneal sag is known, the lens
with the closest matching sag in the set is found. sag of 1.4605 mm that will give an apical clear-
The trial lens sag should always be greater than ance of 4.8 urn. The reverse curve is 6.85 mm
the corneal sag to allow for apical clearance. and the alignment curve 8.09 mm. The tear layer
For example, assuming an apical radius of profile of the trial lens is shown in Figure 6.12.
7.43 mm and an eccentricity of 0.62, the corneal The analysis of the fit of the lens can then be
sag over the 9.20 mm chord is 1.4524 mm. The refined by following the steps outlined in the
closest lens in the set is the 8.60 BOZR lens with a section on topography-based fitting.


=== PAGE 150 ===

150 ORTHOKERATOlOGY
The Dreimlens, R&R, CRT, EZM, and BE trial
lens sets are designed on this type of basis, with
sag differences between lenses of approximately
10 11m. Trial lens sets that have a BOZR difference
of 0.10 mm (20 11m) between lenses will have a
limited range of applications.
The Dreimlenstrial set
The Dreimlens is not usually fitted by means of
trial lenses in the USA, but this is the preferred
method of fitting in Asia. The trial set was origi­
nally designed for use in Hong Kong. This is a
large (56-lens) set. It is a four-zone design with a
6.00 mm BOZD, 0.60 mm wide reverse curve,
1.00 mm wide alignment curve, and a 0.40 mm
wide peripheral curve. The BOZR is set at a target
of 3.00 D refractive change, and the alignment
curves are standard, +10 11m, -10 11m, and -20 11m.
As shown in Chapter 4, variations of 10 11m in
alignment curve mean that the TLT at the
reverse curve / alignment curve intersection is
initially 10 11m (standard lens), and is then
varied in 0.05 mm radius steps either steeper
(+10 11m) or flatter (-10 and -20 11m). The BOZR
of the trial lens is 3.75 D flatter than flat-K, but is
labeled as the flat-K value. The initial trial lens
selected is based on the flat-K value and the
standard alignment curve. If the lens is too steep
or flat, a lens with a looser or tighter alignment
curve is used.
Figure 6.12 The tear
layerprofile for a lens
designedfor an apical
radius of 7.43 mmand an
eccentricityof 0.62,
where the corneal sag
overthe 9.20 mmchord is
1.4524mm. The closest
lens in the set is the 8.60
back optic zone radius
lens with a sag of
1.4605mm that will give
an apical clearanceof
4.8 11m. The reverse curve
is 6.85mm and the
alignmentcurve 8.09 mm.
Alterations to the reverse curve are made by
changing the BOZR. A change of 0.10 mm in
BOZR alters the sag of the reverse curve by 4 11m
and the alignment curve by 10 11m. The assess­
ment of the trial lens is based on the fluorescein
pattern and lens movement and centration.
Lenses that decenter superiorly are considered to
be too loose, and those that decenter inferiorly
too tight. Lateral decentration is resolved by
increasing the diameter to 10.6 mm and using a
five-zone lens. Once the preferred fit is achieved,
overrefraction is performed and the lens ordered.
Overnight trial wear periods are not performed.
Paragon CRT trial set
This is also a large set, consisting of over
100 lenses. There are 20 base curves at 0.1 mm
intervals and four return or reverse zone depths
with three different tangential peripheries.
Further custom lenses are available for patients
with corneal topographies that fall outside the
80% of corneas that can be fitted from the inven­
tory. The available return zone depths range
from 350 to 750 microns in steps of 25 microns.
These values represent the sag difference
between the BOZD and the tangent. The cone
angles range from 27° to 37° in 1 ° intervals. All
trial lenses in the set have one of three preset
cone angles. The BOZD is a constant 6.00 mm
and the reverse zone and tangent are each


=== PAGE 151 ===

1.00 mm wide, including the sigmoid proximity
blends. The common diameter is 10.50 mm. A
lens with the BOZR and return zone depth and
cone angle suggested by use of the slide rule
lens selector is inserted and the fluorescein
pattern assessed. If the centration and fitting
pattern are not ideal the return zone depth is
altered first to achieve the appropriate width of
the central apparent contact zone and then the
tangential periphery is altered to give the correct
peripheral clearance and optimize centration.
The BE lens
The set consists of a minimum of 25 lenses, of
either 11.00or 10.6 mm diameter. There is a sepa­
rate design and trial set for Asian eyes (A-BE).
BOZRs range from 7.85 to 9.10 mm in 0.05-mm
steps. The cone angles vary with each lens, and
are based on an arithmetic mean of the common
ranges of eccentricities for each value of Ro. The
eccentricities are weighted towards the lower end
of the range for flatter corneas, and the higher
range for steeper corneas. The initial corneal
shape data are entered into the computer
program, and the closest matching trial lens with
a BOZR that gives apical clearance calculated and
displayed. There is a sag difference of 8 J.1m
between each consecutive lens in the set. The trial
lens is inserted, the fluorescein pattern checked,
and the patient advised to trial-wear the lens
overnight. Any alterations to the final lens param­
eters are then made using the postwear diagnos­
tic software.
R&R lens set
The R&R set consists of a BOZR range of
7.85-9.25 mm in 0.10-mm steps. A larger set in
0.05-mm steps is also available. The diameters are
10.00or 10.60 mm. Assessment of fit is carried out
by fluorescein pattern analysis, and the BOZR
based on the Jessen factor with a compression
factor of an extra 0.50 D.
The Contex E set
There is no set limit to the number of lenses in
this set. It can range from as few as 10 lenses to
89 lenses. The common diameter is 10.6, and lens
TRIAL LENS FITTING 151
fit is based on the BOZR being 3.75 D flatter than
Kf and fluorescein pattern analysis. At the time of
writing, no further information on the set or
fitting principles was available.
The Euclid Emerald set
There are 56 lenses in the set, with BOZR ranges
from 40.00 D to 45.50 D based on the BOZR being
3.75 D flatter than Kf' All lenses are + 0.75 D in
power, and the BOZR changes in O.lO-mm steps
over a refractive range of 1.00 to 4.00 D. The
alignment curves are linked to the BOZR, such
that each lens in the series has an alignment curve
that is 0.10 mm flatter or steeper than the next.
The choice of trial lens is similar to that used for
the Dreimlens, with fluorescein pattern analysis
used to determine the correct fit.
GelflexEZM lenses
The common diameters are 10.6 or 11.2 mm, with
BOZRs ranging from 7.80 to 9.00 mm. As stated
in Chapter 3, the cone angles vary with the
BOZR. All lenses are plano-powered, with three
fenestrations in at the BOZD / reverse curve junc­
tion at 120 0 intervals. A computer program is
used to determine the correct BOZR based on
inputted topography data.
Other lens designs also have trial lens sets
available, but details were not available at the
time of writing.
The descriptions of the various lens designs given
in this section should allow the practitioner to
make informed decisions as to what trial lens set
is best suited to the type of fitting philosophy pre­
ferred. It is then a simple matter of approaching
the manufacturer to find out what type of tech­
nical support is available for that design.
CARE AND MAINTENANCE OF TRIAL
LENSES
Unlike most RGP lenses, orthokeratology lenses
are preferably stored dry. This is primarily due to
the possibility that dried wetting solution can bind
to the lens back surface and form a rough film that
is difficult to remove, but, more importantly, can
cause marked central corneal staining. Following a

=== PAGE 152 ===

152 ORTHOKERATOLOGY
trial lens period, the lenses should be thoroughly
cleaned and then gently dried with a soft tissue
and stored dry. Care must be taken to avoid dust
and contaminant accumulation in the storage case,
as this can cause scratching of the lens surface. If
there is concern regarding the transmission of
prion-related disease like variant Creutzfeldt­
Jakob disease (v-CJD), then best practice dictates
that the current disinfection guidelines using 2%
sodium hypochlorite (Milton) are followed.
FLUORESCEIN PATTERN ANALYSIS
with spherical RGP fitting, the appearance of the
fluorescein pattern is of major importance in deter­
mining the accuracy of the fit but this is not the
case in contemporary reverse geometry fitting.
Orthokeratology lenses are fitted with a specific
outcome in mind, the controlled reformation of
corneal shape, and the appearance of the fluores­
cein pattern of the lens gives little useful informa­
tion as to the likely effect the lens has on corneal
shape, other than excluding lenses with grossly
inaccurate fitting patterns. Both Reim (2000) and
Mountford & Noack (2001) have questioned the
relative accuracy and value of fluorescein pattern
analysis with RGLs. Fluorescein fitting assessment
serves solely to exclude lenses showing a gross
misfitting to the underlying cornea.
Fluorescein pattern analysis is a time-honored
part of contact lens practice, and has been shown
to be an accurate method of assessing the fit of
a conventional lens (Brungardt 1961, Mandell
1974, Osborne et al 1989). Studies have shown
that, with training, practitioners are capable of
determining the fit of a lens to a tolerance of
0.05 mm in BOZR. Does this apply to RGLs for
orthokeratology?
Figure 6.13 shows a range of "ideal" fluores­
cein patterns of different lens designs. The first
thing to note is that a lot of the lenses have identi­
cal fluorescein patterns, irrespective of the BOZR
chosen. There are commonalities in the assess­
ment of the patterns in that the following "rules"
apply to most of the designs:
1. The lens must center.
2. There should be an area of apparent "touch"
over the pupil zone.
C
Figure 6.13 (Al The ContextElens; (B) the Emerald
lens; (Cl the CKR lens.


=== PAGE 153 ===

TRIAL LENS FITTING 153
F I
Figure 6.13 (0) the ReinhartReeves lens; (E) the Dreimlens;(F) the BE lens; (G) the Nightmovelens; (H) the Fargo lens;
(I) the Paragon CRT lens.


=== PAGE 154 ===

154 ORTHOKERATOLOGY
3. The alignment zone should appear as a wide
band of close alignment or touch.
4. The reverse zone should be either narrow
and deep (four- and five-zone) or wide and
tapered (EZM and BE).
The one variant to this accepted appearance is the
Contex E design, which is apparently optimally
fitted with a relatively loose mid-peripheral align­
ment zone and some decentration acceptable.
Fluorescein dissolves in the tear film, with its con­
centration and fluorescence dependent on the
thickness of the tear film under the lens. Steep­
fitting lenses exhibit greater fluorescence under
the central area of the lens due to the relative con­
centration of fluorescein molecules present and
the deeper tear layer present centrally than in the
more peripheral areas. The minimum TLT
required for fluorescein to become visible given
the concentrations commonly used in clinical
practice is in the order of 20 urn (Carney 1972,
Guillon & Sammons 1994).
The tear layer profile of a four-curve lens is
shown in Figure 6.14. If a line is drawn at the
20 urn point on the y-axis parallel to the x-axis,
then all points above the line will appear as visible
fluorescein, and all points below the line will
appear as areas of touch. The fluorescein pattern of
the lens is shown in Figure 6.15, with the areas of
Figure 6.15 Fluoresceinpattern of a four-zonelens.
Notethat the areas of touch and clearanceare similarin
area to the tear graph shown in Figure 6.14.
touch and visible fluorescein reflecting that shown
in the tear layer profile graph. Theoretically, for
each increase in central TLT of 10 urn, the BOZR
would need to be steepened by 0.05 mm, so at
best, fluorescein pattern analysis would only be
sensitive to changes of ± 0.10 mm in BOZR of
RGLs. This is not the case in practice, as quite large
changes in BOZR often occur before distinct
changes in fluorescein pattern become obvious.
Mountford et al (2003) fitted two patients,
one Caucasian and one Asian, with both the
Dreimlens and the BE lens, as well as standard
Figure 6.14 Tear layerprofile of
a four-curvelens. Parts of the
profile above the 20 urn line will
appearasclearance,or visible
fluorescein,whilst thoseareas
underthe line will appearas
"touch."


=== PAGE 155 ===

spherical lenses (Menicon design). The lenses
were fitted according to the designer's nomo­
grams following repeated topography readings.
Each patient then had lenses fitted 0.05 mm
steeper or flatter than the ideal BOZR to a
maximum of 0.10 mm variation in fitting. The
fluorescein patterns were photographed with a
charge-coupled device (CCO) slit-lamp system
until an optimal representation of each lens fit
was achieved. The photos were then transferred
to PowerPoint and their position on the slide ran­
domized. A letter from A to E was then randomly
applied to each photo. Two groups of practi-
TRIAL LENS FITTING 155
tioners, 11 experienced orthokeratologists (OK),
and 21 nonorthokeratologists (NOK), were then
shown the slides and asked to choose the ideal­
fitting spherical and RGL and then nominate the
next steepest and flattest lens in sequence. The rele­
vant BE fluorescein patterns are shown in Figure
6.16. Forced choice was applied. Nonparametric
(chi-square and Fisher's exact test) analysis was
used to determine the significance of the results.
Both groups could recognize the ideal contour
fit on the Caucasian eye (64% and 64%), but
differed with the Asian eye, as both groups
tended to choose the flatter lens as the ideal fit
Figure 6.16 The
fluoresceinpatternsof a
range of BE lenses on the
same eye areshown with
calculatedtear layer
thicknessunderthe apex of
the lens. Even with such a
wide variation inback optic
zone radius (BOZRj, the
patternsall appearsimilar.
The ideal fit is the 8.65 mm
BOZR.


=== PAGE 156 ===

156 ORTHOKERATOLOGY
Percentageof correctchoicesof lensfit
(64% OK, 52% NOK). The rest of the lens choices
for the alignment lenses were no better than that
expected by chance. However, neither group
could correctly identify the correct, flatter, or
Figure 6.17 Distributionof correctlens choicesfor
orthokeratologist(OK) practitionerand
nonorthokeratologists(NOK). Both groupscould accurately
determinethe correctalignmentlens, but neithergroup
could determinethe correctreverse geometrylens.To do
betterthan chance,the score needsto be greaterthan
19%;however,the NOK Dreimlensbarshown at the top of
the graph was not statisticallysignificant.
steeper RGLs. All choices were less than that
expected by chance. Surprisingly, the NOKs rou­
tinely did better than the OKs in this part of the
study, but the differences were not statistically
significant (Fig. 6.17). Also, there was no differ­
ence in the OKs' ability to choose a lens they were
familiar with (the Dreimlens) from one to which
they had no previous exposure (BE).
The lenses fitted resulted in a spread of
± 20 urn in apical clearance from the ideal fit. In
effect, the results show that the TLT could vary
from -15 um to +25 urn at the apex of the cornea
and that the difference could not be determined
Figure 6.18 A groupof Dreim
lenses on thesame eye. Asin
Figure 6.17, a lackof
differentiation between
successivelens fits occurs.
Courtesyof Tom Reim.


=== PAGE 157 ===

by either the experienced OKs or the novices. The
results of the study found that fluorescein pattern
analysis of RGLs was not sufficiently accurate,
and that the ability to determine the correct lens
did not improve with experience.
The reason for this appears to be related to the
forces acting in the postlens tear film. RGLs apply
positive (compressive) force centrally and negat­
ive (tension) forces at the BOZO (see Ch. 10). This
can be visualized in the old adage that flat lenses
flatten the cornea and steep lenses steepen it.
RGLs are the only designs that have elements of
both forces acting under them. Engineers use the
"surf and sand" metaphor to explain how parti­
cles move away from areas of positive force. If a
wave (positive force) moves across the beach
surface, the sand (particles) moves away from the
advancing force.
Fluorescein is in solution in the tear film;
however, the molecular weight of the fluorescein
molecule is 346, whereas the molecular weight of
the aqueous phase of the tear film is similar to that
of saline (54). The difference in the molecular
weights means that the heavier fluorescein mole­
cule is the "sand" responding to the positive force
under the center of
the lens. The force "moves" the
fluorescein molecules away from the center of the
lens and into the deeper TLT at the edge of the
BOZO. This will lead to an increased concentration
of fluorescein in this area, with a resultant in­
creased fluorescence. Conversely, the relative lack
of fluorescein in the central area will lead to a rela­
tive hypofluorescence and the appearance of
central touch. Reim makes a special point of high­
lighting the inability of fluorescein pattern analysis
to determine the correct Oreimlens accurately
(Fig.6.18).
Also, the response appears to be time­
dependent, with the visibility of the fluorescein in
the reverse curve area becoming greater with
time (Fig. 6.19). Experiments with BE lenses show
that the first appearance of apical clearance occurs
with central TLTs in the range of 45-50 urn.
Some lens designs are totally dependent on
the "correct" interpretation of the trial lens fluores­
cein pattern in order to generate data for the correct
prescription lens. From the results of the above
study, it appears that reliance on the fluorescein
may be misguided, unless, of course, a series of
trial lens fits were photographed and the results ex-
TRIAL LENS FITTING 157
Figure 6.19 Sequenceof imagesshowing the change in
fluoresceinpattern overtime. Note how thefluorescence
appearsto increasein the reverse curve area. The lens has
approximately39 um of apical clearance.
posed to intense scrutiny in order to determine the
optimal pattern. Even with such an approach, the
fluorescein pattern itself will not supply any valid
information as to the corneal response to the lens.
However, it is extremely worthwhile assessing
the fitting using fluorescein for the following
reasons:
1. Gross misfits due to poor topographical data
are immediately apparent.


=== PAGE 158 ===

158 ORTHOKERATOLOGY
2. The practitioner can be certain that there is
adequate peripheral clearance and therefore
that the lens is not impinging on the cornea.
3. The presence of some degree of movement can
be discerned.
4. The lens position can be assessed. With the
lens in place, the patient is asked to close the
eyes and pretend to be asleep. The eyes are
left closed for approximately 20 s, and the
patient is asked to open them again without
consciously looking at anything. The position
of the lens immediately on eye opening gives
an accurate assessment of where it will center
during eye closure. Lenses that are grossly off­
center can be refitted immediately.
Cho et al (2002) interviewed 12 experienced
orthokeratologists in Hong Kong in order to
determine the type of lenses used and the
general mode of practice of orthokeratology. All
practitioners used trial lens fitting, with most
requiring two sets of lenses to achieve the refrac­
tive goal. In general, the higher the refractive
change required, the greater the number of lenses
needed. The most commonly fitted lenses were
the Dreimlens, Fargo 6, and Conte x designs.
It is extremely important to assess the fluores­
cein pattern using a barrier filter. This is a yellow
Wratten 14 filter held in front of the observation
system of the slit-lamp microscope. Figure 6.20
shows a lens imaged with and without a barrier
filter in place.
TOPOGRAPHY-BASEDFITTING
As set out in Chapter 2, topographers show a
very high degree of accuracy and repeatability
when measuring different spherical and aspheric
test surfaces (Applegate et al 1995, Hilmantel
et al 1999, Tang et al 2000). The accuracy and
repeatability of topographers are poorer, how­
ever, when human eyes are measured (Jeandervin
& Barr 1998, Hough & Edwards 1999). There is
one simple fact that must be understood with
regard to the reported accuracy of a particular
topographer on human eyes, and that is it is
impossible to know what an accurate reading is,
as the exact shape of the eye is unknown. Topo­
graphers determine the model of corneal shape
using reconstruction algorithms to interpret
the reflections of the mires from the corneal sur­
face, so the "picture" will vary depending on the
following factors:
1. the reconstruction algorithms used
2. the accuracy of the capture method (automatic
or manual)
3. the stability of the patient (movement,
fixation, tear layer stability)
4. the state of the instrument's calibration
5. the variation of the corneal profile from that of
the model aspheric or spherical surface.
In routine clinical practice, it is common for one
single topography plot to be taken of each eye,
and the fit of the lens to be based on the data.
However, for any given single topography plot,
there are four possible outcomes with respect to
the accuracy of the data, especially as regards
elevation.
1. The data are accurate.
2. The topographer overestimatedthe elevation.
3. The topographer underestimatedthe elevation.
4. The data are totally inaccurate.
Figure 6.20 Lens imaged
with (A) and without (B) a
barrier filter in place.
A B


=== PAGE 159 ===

The real problem with doing one single reading is
that the practitioner does not know which of the
above outcomes applies.
The ideal solution to this dilemma is to take
four to six repeated readings of the eye and
determine the degree of error or the repeatability
of the instrument for both apical radius and
eccentricity or elevation. The concept of applying
statistical methods to repeated readings was
introduced by Lowe (unpublished), as a means of
refining the fit of the lens, and gaining greater
accuracy with the final lens parameters.
Assuming that four plots are taken, the method
is as follows:
1. Compare the left and right eye maps for
similarities in apical radius and eccentricity.
They should be similar. Marked differences
between the two eyes usually indicate that one
of the plots is invalid. An example is shown in
Figure 6.21. Place all four maps on the screen
and assess them for any gross problems like
excessive brow or nose shadow, stray eye­
lashes, or gross discrepancies in apical radius
or eccentricity values. The "rogue" readings
should be discarded and a replacement plot
TRIAL LENS FITTING 159
taken. Figure 6.22 shows repeated readings of
the left eye shown in Figure 6.21. The con­
siderable variation in apical radius values
and the poor repeatability were due to a very
unstable tear film. The eye was lubricated and
the readings retaken.
2. Record the apical radius (in mm) and eccen­
tricity values in different columns of a spread­
sheet. If elevation data are given by the
topographer, use those in preference to the
eccentricity values. Make sure that the eccen­
tricity or elevation is recorded at the chord of
contact between the lens and the cornea.
3. If only Ro and eccentricity are available, calcu­
late the elevation or sag using the formula:
Sag (elevation) = (Ro- '-'Ro2 - y2p) /p
where Ro is apical radius, y is half the chord of
contact between the lens and the cornea, and p
the shape factor or (1 - e2) . Table 6.5 details the
spreadsheet set-up and formulas required for the
calculations.
Once the elevations are calculated, the mean
and standard deviations are derived using the
function wizard. This is a time-consuming task.
Hough & Edwards (1999) have recommended
Figure 6.21 A comparison
between the topography
plots of two eyes. Note that
the left is not similar to the
right.


=== PAGE 160 ===

160 ORTHOKERATOLOGY
Figure 6.22 Repeated
readingsof the left eye
shown in Figure 6.20. Note
the variation in apical radius
values and the poor
repeatability.The patient
had a veryunstabletear
film. The eye should be
lubricatedand the readings
retaken.
Table 6.5 An Excel spreadsheetfor determining the corneal sag. Input the relevant details and formulas so that
column Econtains the sag value. If a group of readingsare taken, put each into column Fand then usethe
function wizard to calculate the mean and standarddeviation.
Column A1 (Ro) Column 81 (p) Column C1 Column D1 (1/2 chord) Column E1 (corneal sag)
(eccentricity)
A2 = Ro 82 = P C2 = Eccentricity D2 = 1/2chord (mm) E2 =cornealsag
Formula: Value =9.20 for Formula= (A2-(sqrt A2·2-
=(1 - C2"2) 10.00 mm lens (D2·2*82)))/82
that the different topography companies incor­
porate this type of statistical tool in their respec­
tive software. To date this has only been done by
Medmont, who include a program that calculates
the mean and standard deviation of the apical
radius, eccentricity, elevation, and keratometry
readings at any chord or axis chosen by the practi­
tioner for up to four repeated readings (Fig. 6.23).
If the above seems too time-consuming, an
alternative is to determine what the standard
deviation of the topographer is in the measure­
ment of the elevation data for 10 repeated meas­
ures on the same normal eye using the method
set out above. Then, when measuring the corneas
of the individual patient, perform two repeat
measurements and only perform a third if
the first two differ by more than one standard
deviation. The readings that fall within one stand­
ard deviation of one another are then averaged
and these data are used. This practical approach
was suggested by Bloom (unpublished).
Additionally, if topography data are to be used
in order to fit a contact lens to a specified accuracy,
a degree of tolerance must be set that is rigorous
enough to allow for proper clinical decisions. If,
for example, it is required to fit the BOZR to a
tolerance of 0.05 mm, then the measurement toler­
ance of the topographer has to be ± 0.025 mm.
Similarly, if the lens needs to be fitted with an
apical clearance tolerance of 5 urn, then the instru­
ment measurement tolerance for elevation must
not exceed ± 2.5 urn (Hough & Edwards 1999).
The stated tolerance for lens manufacture with
computer numeric-controlled (CNC) lathes is in


=== PAGE 161 ===

Figure 6.23 The mean and standarddeviationsof the
range of corneal data valuesfrom the Medmont
topographer.Notethat the chord over which the
measurementsare taken is variable,as is theaxis.
the order of ± 0.01 mm or ± 2 urn. Depending on
the topographer used and the experience of the
practitioner, the common range of error when
measuring the elevation of human corneas can be
from ± 2 urn to ± 15 urn (Cho et al 2002). The
important question, then, is how many repeated
readings are required in order to achieve a
repeatability standard deviation of ± 2 urn?
Hough & Edwards (1999) give the following
relationship that is used to determine the number
of repeated readings that would fulfill the
requirements set out above:
N =(S,/sy
where N is the number of readings required,S, is
the reproducibility standard deviation, and S, is
the repeatability standard deviation.
Cho et al (2002) measured the repeatability and
reproducibility of four different topographers on
a group of Asian subjects, and determined the
number of readings required from each instru­
ment with the S, limit set to 2 urn. The Medmont
E300 had the best performance with only two
repeat readings required. The Humphrey Atlas
required 12, the Dicon 64, and the Orbscan 552.
However, this degree of accuracy in fitting is
only required to determine the final lens para­
meters, and not the trial lens. Since the difference
in trial lens sag between successive lenses is in
TRIAL LENS FITTING 161
the range of 10 urn, the tolerance for topographi­
cal elevation should be in the range of ± 5 urn.
HOW TO USE THE TOPOGRAPHYDATA
There are now two known facts that the practi­
tioner must understand. Firstly, the accuracy of
the topography data is unknown, but the stan­
dard deviation of error is known. Secondly, the
accuracy of the sag height of the contact lens is
known to a tolerance of ± 2 urn.
The concept with topography fitting is to
compare that which is known (the sag of the trial
lens) to that which is not known (the sag of the
cornea) and use the corneal response to the trial
lens to refine the fit.
For example, if the topographer gives a corneal
elevation value of 1500 urn with a standard de­
viation of ± 10 urn, then the range of possible
corneal elevations to the 95% confidence level
is 1480-1520 urn, which is based on the 95%
confidence level being equal to twice the standard
deviation.
The sag philosophy states that lens sag is equal
to corneal sag (elevation) plus the TLT. Taking the
mean elevation value and adding 5 urn for TL1~
the required sag of the trial lens is 1505 urn. In
other words, the mean value is always used as
the basis for determining the initial trial lens.
Once the mean and standard deviation of error
of the instrument for the individual patient
are recorded, the practitioner will have a good
idea of the range of trial lenses that may be
required to achieve an optimal fit. For example,
in the above case where the corneal elevation
range is from 1480 to 1520 urn, the number of
possible trial lenses, assuming a sag difference of
10 urn between lenses, is four.
The important fact to remember is that the
topographer may have a standard deviation of
error of ± 10 urn, but the lens has an error of
±2fLm.
The trial lens based on the mean value is
then inserted and the fluorescein pattern assessed
mainly for lens centration. If the fluorescein pattern
is either grossly too steep or flat, then the initial
indications are that the topography data are hope­
lessly inaccurate, and should be repeated. In most
cases, however, the fluorescein pattern will show
the typical reverse geometry appearance. The


=== PAGE 162 ===

162 ORTHOKERATOLOGY
patient is then taught insertion and removal and
advised to sleep in the lenses that night and return
in the morning with the lenses in situ for assess­
ment. A full description of the postwear clinical
assessment is given in Chapter 9.
ASSESSINGTHE POST-TRIALTOPOGRAPHY
The next step is to perform corneal topography
measurements. This is probably the most valu­
able tool in assessing the accuracy of the corneal
response to the lens, and provides invaluable
information for refining the fit of the final lens
design. The plot is taken and then a subtractive
plot of the prefit and postwear generated.
Topographical analysis shows that there are
four common outcomes from an overnight trial: a
bull's-eye pattern, smiley face, smiley face with
fake central island, and central islands.
Bull's eye
If the corneal data from the topographer were
accurate, the trial lens will be an ideal fit, and will
result in a bull's-eye postwear plot (Fig. 6.24). The
diagnosis of the bull's eye is always done using
the axial, tangential, and refractive power sub­
tractive maps. The axial difference map shows the
refractive change achieved at the corneal apex,
and has a high correlation with the change in
subjective refraction (Mountford 1997, Soni &
Nguyen 2002). The refractive change achieved
after the first night's wear is dependent on
the number of hours the lens has been worn
(Sridharan 2001) and the actualapical clearance of
the lens (Mountford & Noack 2001). If the fit is
ideal, and the apical clearance correct, the refrac­
tive change achieved in the first night of wear
will be approximately 70% of the total change
required (Swarbrick & Alharbi unpublished).
However, the assessment of a successful over­
night trial is not based on refractive change, but
on the centration of the treatment zone.
The tangential power map is ideal for assess­
ing the accuracy of centration of the treatment
zone (Fig. 6.24B). Note that the "red ring" is per­
fectly centered around the pupil zone.
Refractive power maps also playa part in the
postwear assessment of the changes. The treat­
ment zone diameter is overestimated with the
Figure 6.24 The axial (Al.
tangential (B), and
refractive power(e) maps
of a bull's-eyetopography
plot taken after an
overnight-wear period.The
axial mapshows the
refractivechange, the
tangential the centration of
the effect, and the
refractive mapthe
treatment zone diameter.
Note the excellent
centration.


=== PAGE 163 ===

c
axial map and underestimated with the tangen­
tial map. The refractive power map gives a more
accurate measure of the actual zone (Fig. 6.24C).
TRIAL LENS FITTING 163
Figure 6.24 Cont'd.
The cursor is moved from the center of the map
nasally and temporally until the point of zero
change between the pre- and postwear maps is


=== PAGE 164 ===

164 ORTHOKERATOLOGY
reached. The addition of the two values gives the
treatment zone diameter. Also, in cases where it is
difficult to make a final decision as to small
degrees of decentration due to the corneal apex
being decentered, the pre- and postwear refrac­
tive power maps can be used to see if the refrac­
tive change is central with respect to the initial
corneal power distribution.
In cases where the initial corneal eccentricity is
high, but only a low refractive change is required,
the appearance of the bull's eye will not be as dis­
tinctive. Also, since the treatment zone diameter
increases in diameter over the first week of wear,
it is not uncommon to see incomplete bull's-eye
pattern formation after the first overnight trial
(Fig. 6.25). The single most important factor is the
cent ration of the effect. Bull's-eye patterns are
the only acceptable result of a trial lens fitting.
The resulting corneal shape changes are well­
centered and even in appearance, with little or no
distortion in the central zone, resulting in good
unaided visual acuity.
Smiley-facepattern
Smiley-face patterns (Fig. 6.26) are indicative of a
flat-fitting lens that has decentered superiorly,
typically due to instrument underestimationof the
corneal elevation or sag. Underestimation of
the elevation is equivalent to an overestimation
of the eccentricity. If the eccentricity is over­
estimated, the alignment curve or tangent of the
lens will be too flat. When the rest of the lens con­
struction is based on this value, the result is a
flat-fitting lens. Also, the apical clearance will
theoretically be less than zero, and the lens back
surface will come into direct contact with the
corneal apex. The force of the lid, combined with
a redistribution of the tear film squeeze forces
behind the lens will make the lens move superior­
temporally in order for equilibrium to occur.
When the lens decenters in this manner, the
topography shows an area of flattening superior to
the pupil, with a crescent of inferior steepening in
the pupil zone. This is the classical smiley-face
pattern. Figure 6.26A shows the axial power
change. Refraction in theses cases usually yields a
moderate decrease in myopia, but an increase in
with-the-rule astigmatism. Unaided high-contrast
acuity is also usually good, but associated with
symptoms of ghosting and flare. Confirmation of
the decentration is best done with the tangential
power map (Fig. 6.26B).Note that the "red ring" is
decentered superiorly. The degree of decentration
is related to the underestimation of the corneal ele­
vation, in that the greater the decentration, the
greater the underestimation of the elevation.
Smiley-face patterns are an unacceptable out­
come for an overnight trial, as the resulting topog­
raphy has induced corneal distortion. The patient
should return for a further overnight trial with a
steeper lens until a bull's-eye plot is achieved.
Smiley face with fake central island
Smiley faces with fake central islands (Fig. 6.27)
represent an even greater underestimation of the
corneal sag than a normal smiley face. In these
cases, the lens sag is much less than the corneal sag,
leading to heavy central touch that results in
epithelial damage. The disruption of the surface
causes distortion and linkage of the reflected mires,
which the instrument then reconstructs as an area
of steepening. The key diagnosis is made by the
tangential power difference map (Fig. 6.278) and
the appearance of central corneal staining. Further
confirmation can be made by deleting the color
map from the image and inspecting the central
mires for distortion (Fig. 6.28). Once again, this is a
totally unacceptable outcome, and the patient must
be scheduled for a further overnight trial with a
steeper lens until a bull's-eye plot is achieved.
Central island pattern
Central islands (Fig. 6.29) are usually caused by
a steep or tight lens as a result of instrument
overestimation of the corneal sag or elevation.
Since the development of the dual RGLs such as
the Dreimlens and the BE, or lenses of larger total
diameter, central islands have become the more
common postwear plot, as compared to smiley
faces, which are more common with the three­
curve RGLs. The classic hallmarks of a central
island are an area of relative steepening centrally,
surrounded by an annulus of marked corneal
flattening. The central island itself can be either
steeper than the original cornea, or simply steeper
than the surrounding annulus of corneal flattening.

=== PAGE 165 ===

B
Clinical experience shows that small central
islands (0.500 or less) that are flatter than
the original cornea, but still steeper than the
TRIAL LENS FITTING 165
Figure 6.25 The change
in bull's-eyepattern
appearancebetweenthe
first overnightwear (A), and
that after 8 days later (8).
Note theincreasein
treatment zone with time.
surrounding area, will resolve within 1 week of
lens wear. However, central islands greater than
this degree, or those where the apical corneal


=== PAGE 166 ===

166 ORTHOKERATOLOGY
B
power is steeper than the original value, will not
resolve. The difference is that a small island
indicates a small degree of inaccuracy in the
Figure 6.26 (A) Axial and
(B) tangential maps of a
smiley-facepattern.The
tangential maphighlights
the decentrationof the lens.
initial fit, whereas a steep island indicates a large
degree of initial fitting error. The BOZR of the
lens is usually not at fault in these cases. An


=== PAGE 167 ===

B
overestimation of the corneal sag will also result
in a tighter cone angle or alignment curve in the
periphery, and it may well be the compression
caused by the tight periphery of the lens that is
TRIAL LENS FITTING 167
Figure 6.27 (Aand B)
A smileyface with a fake
central island.
responsible for the formation of central
islands.
The diagnosis of the central island is again the
tangential power subtractive map. The centration


=== PAGE 168 ===

168 ORTHOKERATOLOGY
with central islands is always perfect. When a
central island occurs, unaided visual acuity is
usually worse than the prefit values. Also, over­
refraction leads to no clear endpoint, and the best
corrected visual acuity is usually two lines or
more less than normal. The refraction data from a
central island are of no clinical importance.
It should be appreciated that some topo­
graphers, particularly the Keratron, can give false
central island maps due to the reconstruction
algorithm used. The Keratron does not apply
smoothing to the central data, so as the arc-step
method approaches the tangent normal to the
optic axis, the value of the apical corneal power
becomes unpredictable. Keratron users are ad­
vised to compare the refractive power maps
before and after, and not subtractive, to deter­
mine if a true central island is present.
OTHER POSTWEAR RESULTS
There are two other possible outcomes from an
overnight trial that occur rarely. The first is a
frowny face (Fig. 6.30), where the lens appears to
Figure 6.28 If the color
mapis removed,the
distortion of the Placido
mires becomesvisible.This
leads to invalid central
data and the appearance
of a central divot (see
Figure 6.31).
be decentered either inferiorly or laterally. The
cause is the same in either case: overestimation of
elevation leading to a tight alignment curve, or a
lens diameter that is too small. The second is
termed a "central divot" (Fig. 6.31), and is caused
by apical touch leading to epithelial disruption cen­
trally. The mires of the placido become linked, and
the reconstruction algorithm represents the data as
a small area of gross central flattening. They can
also occur if the tear layer is disrupted from
a bound lens. Simply instilling a drop of lens lubri­
cant and repeating the capture can resolve the
differences. If the divot is due to tear layer instabil­
ity, it will not be present on the second plot.
However, if epithelial compromise did occur, the
divot will still be present. Other types of abnormal
topography outcomes also occur, and are discussed
in greater detail in Chapter 9.
REFINING THE FIT USING POSTWEAR
TOPOGRAPHYDATA
The major force responsible for the corneal shape
changes seen in orthokeratology is the squeeze film


=== PAGE 169 ===

B
force generated by the postlens tear layer (see
Ch. 10).The squeeze film force is dependent on the
variation in TLT between the apex and the periph-
TRIAL LENS FITTING 169
Figure 6.29 (A) Axial and
(8) tangential power maps
of a central island.Notethe
excellentcentration.The
steep central area is
surroundedby anannulus
of flattening.The unaided
vision will be poor.
ery of the lens. The accuracy of the lens fit is there­
fore dependent on the actual TLT under the trial
lens compared to the calculated TLT from the


=== PAGE 170 ===

170 ORTHOKERATOLOGY
Figure 6.30 A frowny­
facepattern from a tight
lens. If the lens decenters
laterally,this is because the
total diameteris toosmall.
Figure 6.31 Central divot
caused by tearlayer
disruptionof the Placido
mires. If lubricant is
instilled and a further map
is taken, the resultsare
normal.


=== PAGE 171 ===

topography data. When the trial lens is calculated
from the initial topography data, an assumption is
made that the corneal sag is correct. The trial lens
sag is therefore equal to the corneal sag plus the
designated apical clearance, or as close to this value
as possible due to the limitations in trial lens set
design. Under normal circumstances, the trial lens
set will need to be in 0.05 mm BOZR increments, as
this will provide a sag difference of approximately
8-10 urn between each successive lens in the set.
So, there are three important factors to consider:
1. The accuracy of the topography data is limited
to approximately ± 10 urn over the common
chord of the lens and cornea.
2. The accuracy of trial lens manufacture will
result in an error of approximately ± 2.0 urn in
the sag of the lens.
3. The nominal sag difference between success­
ive trial lenses is 8-10 urn for each 0.05 mm
difference in BOZR depending on the lens
design.
The trial lens set or the accompanying computer
program should give the sag values of the lenses in
the range provided. The margin of error for the
trial lens set is smaller than the error of the topo­
grapher, so it is a logical argument to compare the
known value of the trial lens against the assumed
value of corneal sag developed by the topography
data.
The original sag formula states:
Lens sag = corneal sag + apical clearance (TLT)
The alternative perspective is:
Corneal sag = lens sag - apical clearance
So, if the subtractive plot shows a bull's-eye
pattern, irrespective of the refractive change
achieved, then it can be assumed that the calcu­
lated topography corneal sag value is relatively
accurate. If a smiley-face pattern is evident, then
the calculated corneal sag value is equal to or less
than that of the indicated trial lens to a degree
somewhere near the standard deviation of error
of the instrument. A central island indicates that
the calculated corneal sag has been overestimated
by the topographer, as the sag value is greater
than the difference between the lens sag and the
apical clearance value.
TRIAL lENS FITTING 171
The practitioner now has two logical choices as
to which lens should next be tried if the postwear
topography plots gave unacceptable results:
1. Alter the corneal sag by a value equal to the
standard deviation of error of the instrument,
and recalculate a new trial lens.
2. Trial fit the next flattest or steepest lens in the
trial set until the best fluorescein pattern is
attained. Find the difference in sag between
the correct trial lens and the initial trial lens
and adjust the calculated corneal sag value
accordingly.
If the initial corneal sag is assumed to be 1500 urn
and a trial lens of 8.45 mm BOZR and sag of
1505 urn was tried and resulted in a central
island, the two choices are:
1. Reduce the corneal sag by the standard devia­
tion of the instrument (say 10 urn), resulting in
a corneal sag of 1490 urn, and a trial lens
of 1495 urn assuming an apical clearance of
5 urn. The next closest trial lens has a sag of
1494 urn and a BOZR of 8.50 mm.
2. Flatten the BOZR by an amount similar to the
standard deviation of error of the instrument.
Assuming an 8 urn sag difference in each trial
lens, the next alternate lens would be an
8.50 mm BOZR.
The same approach applies in the case of smiley
faces, except that the corneal sag value must be
increased and the sag value of the trial lens
increased by steepening the BOZR.
These changes are encapsulated in the FAST
rule (Bloom unpublished). The acronym stands for
"flat add, steep take-away." If the corneal elevation
is underestimated, the lens will be flat, so alter­
ations are made by adding to the initial sag value.
Conversely, a steep lens will require the subtrac­
tion of the standard deviation of error of the instru­
ment or the sag difference between trial lenses.
If the above steps are taken, and the results still
show a central island or a smiley face on retrial,
then the error of the initial topography data must
be assumed to be within the range of two standard
deviations of the instrument error. If a retrial with
these corrections is performed, and a poor result is
still evident, then the logical assumption is that the
original topography data were totally inaccurate.

=== PAGE 172 ===

172 ORTHOKERATOLOGY
The patient should then return for further corneal
topography and trial lens fitting. Furthermore, if
the initial indicated trial lens is obviously too steep
or flat, then it has to be assumed that the topo­
graphy data are highly inaccurate.
There are two approaches to this problem. The
first is to repeat the topography and take the mean
Ro and e or elevation values of four or five repeated
measurements and recalculate the trial lens. The
second is to depend on fluorescein pattern analysis
and alter the corneal sag value by the amount of
difference in trial lens sags between the initial cal­
culated trial lens and the one that gave the optimal
pattern. This approach is fraught with inaccuracies,
as it firstly makes the assumption that an ideal
fluorescein pattern will give an ideal response,
which is simply not the case. Secondly, it makes the
assumption that the R o value of the original
reading was accurate, and that the elevation or
eccentricity values were at fault.
No currently available corneal topographer
can measure Ro. All systems use algorithms to
extrapolate from the measured area into the
center to give a value for Ro. However, in order to
calculate a BOZR for the trial lens, the R o value
has to be used. If the original topography read­
ings are within 1 SO of producing a good result,
then it is acceptable to assume that the Ro value is
correct, and that the eccentricity or elevation is at
fault and make corrections to improve the corneal
response. However, postwear plots that produce
repeated central islands or smiley faces when cor­
rections are made indicate highly inaccurate Ro
and e values, necessitating repetition of the
topography plots.
Finally, lenses that decenter laterally cause
decentered treatment zones. The resolution of this
problem is to recalculate for a larger total dia­
meter. It must be emphasized that trial lens fitting
in orthokeratology is primarily performed in
order to validate the original topography data,
especially with respect to the elevation or sag
values. The corneal response to the lens is totally
dependent on the accuracy of the lens fit, where
the apical clearance, in particular, is of vital
importance in generating the required degree of
squeeze film force under the lens. The accuracy
of the corneal data will determine directly the
accuracy of the lens fit and the degree of apical
clearance, and hence the corneal response.
These factors are dealt with in greater detail in
Chapter 10.
The question as to the time required between
trial wear periods has been answered by Sridharan
(2001), who showed that it could take up to
72 h for a cornea to return to baseline following
overnight wear. If a further trial wear is initiated
before the cornea returns to baseline, the results
could be unduly influenced by the previous dis­
tortion still present in the cornea. It would be
appropriate, therefore, to wait at least 72 h before
performing a retrial, with a further prefit topo­
graphy being done to ensure return to baseline.
In conclusion, it must be emphasized that the
only acceptable outcome from an overnight trial
is a bull's-eye pattern. Improvements in unaided
acuity occur with both bull's-eye and smiley-face
patterns, but the quality of the visual acuity is
better with a bull's eye. Unaided visual acuity
is not the standard by which an outcome is
assessed, but rather the quality of the postwear
topography change.
Practitioners who prefer empirical fitting should
insist on knowing the design and curves on the
lenses they are using, and those who judge the
fitting on fluorescein pattern analysis should know
the difference in sag between the lenses in the set.
Orthokeratology, as stated previously, differs from
standard lens fitting, as it is not the appearance of
the lens that determines success, but the effect the
lens has on visual acuity and the quality of the
postwear corneal topography. The only fitting
method that gives the practitioner total control
over lens changes is the topography-based system.
At the time of writing, there have been no con­
trolled studies into the differences in efficacy of the
three different methods of fitting orthokeratology
lenses. Such a study would have a direct practical
benefit, in that practitioners would be better able
to determine the best and most cost-effective
means of fitting the lenses. As with all other types
of contact lens practice, the fitting requires skill
and knowledge, and should not be conducted in a
hit-and-miss manner. The aim should be to get the
right fit first time, all the time. This may, in prac­
tice, be unlikely due to the degree of accuracy
required and the limitations of topography, but
nevertheless, it should still be the aim.

=== PAGE 173 ===

REFERENCES
Applegate R A, Nunez R, Beuttener J, Howland H C (1995)
How accurately can videokeratographic systems measure
surface elevation? Optometry and Vision Science 72:
785-792
Bara C (2000)Mechanism of action of the reverse geometry
gas permeable contact lens in orthokeratology. M Sc
thesis, University of Melbourne
Bennett E 5, Sorbara L (2000)Lens design, fitting and
evaluation. In: Bennett ES, Henry VA(eds) Clinical
manual of contact lenses, 2nd edn. Philadelphia,
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, ch. 4
Bennett E S, Henry V A, Davis LJ, Kirby S (1989)Comparing
empirical and diagnostic fitting of daily wear fluoro­
silicone acrylate contact lenses. Contact Lens Forum 14:
38-44
Brungardt T F (1961)Fluorescein patterns; they are accurate
and they can be mastered. Journal of the American
Optometric Association 32: 973-974
Carney LG (1972) Luminance of fluorescein solutions.
American Journal of Optometry and Archives of the
American Academy of Optometry 3: 200-204
Cho P, Lam A, Mountford J, Ng L (2002a)The performance of
four different corneal topographers on normal human
corneas and its impact on orthokeratology lens fitting.
Optometry and Vision Science (in press)
Cho P, Cheung S W, Edwards M (2002b) Practice of
orthokeratology by a group of contact lens practitioners
in Hong Kong. Part 2. Clinical and Experimental
Optometry 86(1): 42-46
Douthwaite W A (1995) Eyesyscorneal topography
measurement applied to calibrated ellipsoidal convex
surfaces. British Journal of Ophthalmology 79: 797-801
Fedders K, Gultranson BS, Nair B S, Horner D G, Soni S
(1999)Orthokeratology: to fit empirically or use
diagnostic lenses? Optometry and Vision Science 76(125):
170
Guillon M, Sammons W A (1994)Contact lens design. In:
Ruben M, Guillon M (eds) Contact lens practice. London,
Chapman and Hall Medical, ch. 5
Hayashi T (1977) Mechanics of contact lens motion. PhD
thesis. University Of California, Berkeley
Hilrnantel G, Blunt R J, Garrett B P,Howland H C,
Applegate R A (1999)Accuracy of the Tomey topographic
modeling system in measuring surface elevations of
asymmetric objects. Optometry and Vision Science 76:
108-114
Hough T, Edwards K (1999)The reproducibility of
videokeratoscope measurements as applied to the human
cornea. Contact Lens and Anterior Eye 22(3):91-99
Jeandervin M, Barr J T (1998)Comparison of repeat
videokeratography: repeatability and accuracy.
Optometry and Vision Science 75: 663--669
TRIAL LENS FITTING 173
Korb D R, Finnemore V N, Herman J P (1982)Apical changes
and scarring in keratoconus related to contact lens fitting
techniques. Journal of the American Optometric
Association 53: 199-205
Lu L, Zhou L H, Wang Z G, Zhang W H (2001)
Orthokeratology induced infective corneal ulcer.
Investigative Ophthalmology and Vision Science 42(4):
s34
Luk BMW, Bennett E S, Barr J T (2001)Fitting
orthokeratology contact lenses. Contact Lens Spectrum
16(10):30-35
Mandell R B (1974)How valid is the fluorescein test?
International Contact Lens Clinic 1: 25-27
Maruna C, Yoder M, Andrasko G J (1989)Attitudes towards
RGPs among optometrists. Contact Lens Spectrum 4:
25-32
Mountford J A (1997)Orthokeratology. In: Phillips A J,
Speedwell L (eds) Contact lenses: a textbook for
students and practitioner, vol. 4. London, Butterworths,
pp.30-35
Mountford J A, Noack D B (2001)The BE instruction manual.
Brisbane, Australia
Mountford J A, Caroline P, Noack D (2002) Corneal
topography and orthokeratology - pre-fitting evaluation.
Contact Lens Spectrum 17(4):29-35
Mountford J A, Cho P,Chui W S (2003) Is fluorescein pattern
analysis a valid method of assessing the accuracy of
reverse geometry lenses for orthokeratology? Clinical and
Experimental Optometry (in press)
Osborne G N, Zantos S G, Godio L B, Jones W F,Barr JT
(1989)Aspheric rigid gas permeable contact lenses;
practitioner discrimination of base curve increments
using fluorescein pattern evaluation. Optometry and
Vision Science 66(4): 209-213
Rah M J (2002)Patient selection and preliminary results of
the lenses and overnight orthokeratology study. SECO,
March 2002 (abstract)
Reim T (2000)The Dreimlens instruction manual. Dreimlens
International, Alhambra, USA
Soni P, Nguyen T (2002) Which corneal parameter, anterior
corneal curvature, posterior corneal curvature or corneal
thickness is most sensitive to acute changes with reverse
geometry orthokeratology lenses? ARVO Abstracts 3086.
Investigative Ophthalmology and Visual Science
Sridharan R (2001) Response and regression of the cornea
with short-term orthokeratology lens wear. Masters
thesis. University of New South Wales, Sydney,
Australia
Tang W, Collins M, Carney L C, Davis B (2000) Theaccuracy
and precision performance of four videokeratoscopes in
measuring test surfaces. Optometry and Vision Science
77(9):483-491